•4-025 



B31+ 



In 



K 





GJottteU Hmocrattg ffiihtarg 

Stljara, Jfew $ork 



FROM THE 



BENNO LOEWY LIBRARY 

COLLECTED BY 

BENNO LOEWY 

1854-1919 
BEQUEATHED TO CORNELL UNIVERSITY 



^fc£ 



Date Due 








































• 





























































































































































PA 4025.A C 5B91 "i"^ Ub ™ nr 

v.2 

™* Odyssey of Homer / 




3 1924 005 354 570 




The original of this book is in 
the Cornell University Library. 

There are no known copyright restrictions in 
the United States on the use of the text. 



http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924005354570 





Date Due 












Jtnt 


1 7Qjfn 








,if 49 Jf 


* 












































































































i 
i 

































































THE 



ODYSSEY OF HOMER 



TRANSLATED INTO ENGLISH BLANK FERSE 



WILLIAM CULLEN BRYANT 



VOLUME II. 




BOSTON 

lOD i 

.DS, AND F 

1872 



JAMES R. OSGOOD AND COMPANY 

Late Ticknor & Fields, and Fields, Osgood, & Co. 



£s? / &- 




/\1SJ% 



6Lp 



Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1872, 

BY JAMES R. OSGOOD & CO., 

in the Office of the Librarian of Congress, at Washington. 



University Press : Welch, Bigelow, & Co , 
Cambridge. 



CONTENTS 

OF VOL. II. 



BOOK XIII. 

ARRIVAL OF ULYSSES AT ITHACA 

Page 

Departure of Ulysses from the Court of Alcinoiis. — Arrival of the Ship at 
Ithaca. — Ulysses carried on Shore by the Phaeacians while asleep, and 
left. — His Treasures landed also. — The Ship, while returning, trans- 
formed by Neptune into a Rock. — Dialogue between Pallas and Ulys- 
ses concerning the Destruction of the Suitors. — Concealment of the 
Treasures in a Cave. — Transformation of Ulysses into an Old Man . i 



BOOK XIV. 

MEETING OF ULYSSES AND EUMjEUS. 

Hospitable Reception by Eumaeus of Ulysses in the Disguise of a Beggar. — 
His Feigned Account of himself. — His Promise that Ulysses shall re- 
turn. — Supper in the Lodge of Eumasus. — Stratagem of Ulysses to 
procure a Cloak for the Night ........ 25 

BOOK XV. 

RETURN OF TELEMACHUS. 

Appearance of Pallas in a Dream to Telemachus, warning him to return to 
Ithaca. — His Departure from Lacedaemon, and Arrival at Pylos. — 
Theoclymenus, an Augur, taken on Board by him at Pylos. — The Story 
of Eumxus related by him to Ulysses. — Arrival of Telemachus at the 
Coast of Ithaca. — The Ship sent forward to the City, while Telema- 
chus, having committed Theoclymenus to the Care of his Friend 
Pirasus, goes to the Lodge of Eumajus 53 



IV 



Contents. 



BOOK XVI. 

ULYSSES DISCOVERING HIMSELF TO TELEMACHUS. 

Reception of Telemachus by Eumsus, who is sent to inform Penelope of 
her Son's Arrival. — Interview of Ulysses and Telemachus, in which, at 
the Command of Pallas, Ulysses discovers himself. — Return of the 
Disappointed Suitors from lying in Wait for Telemachus . .82 

BOOK XVII. 

RETURN OF ULYSSES TO HIS PALACE. 

Meeting of Telemachus and Penelope, Ulysses conducted by Eumsus to 
the Palace, where he is known by the Dog Argus, who dies on seeing 
him. — Entrance of Ulysses among the Suitors. — Assault made by An- 
tinoiis upon Ulysses. — Ulysses sent for by Penelope . . . .107 

BOOK XVIII. 

COMBAT OF ULYSSES AND IRUS. 

Ulysses insulted by the Beggar Irus. — Amusement of the Suitors, who en- 
courage the Quarrel. — Victory of Ulysses in the Combat with Irus. 
— Manoeuvre of Penelope to obtain Presents from the Suitors, and its 
Success. — Ulysses insulted by Eurymachus. — His Reply. — The Cup- 
bearer struck down by a Footstool flung at Ulysses by Eurymachus . .139 

BOOK XIX. 

ULYSSES RECOGNIZED BY EURYCLEIA. 

Removal of the Weapons from the Hall by Ulysses and his Son. — Inter- 
view of Penelope and Ulysses, who tells her that he has seen her Hus- 
band in Crete, describes his Person and Dress, and affirms that within 
a Month he will be in Ithaca. — The Bath administered to Ulysses by 
Eurycleia, who recognizes him by a Scar on his Leg. — Narrative of the 
Manner in which the Scar was caused . . . . . .162 

BOOK XX. 

THE LAST BANQUET OF THE SUITORS. 

Disorderly Conduct of the Serving- Women. — Prayer of Ulysses for a Favor- 
able Omen. — Its Fulfilment. — Preparations for a Feast of the Suitors 
in the Palace, — The Feast. — Ulysses insulted by Ctesippus, who is 
reproved by Telemachus. — Strange Prodigies observed by Theocly- 
menus, who leaves the Hall ...... 



Contents. v 



BOOK XXI. 

THE BENDING OF THE BOW OF ULYSSES. 
Proposal of Penelope to the Suitors to contend for her Hand with the Bow 
and Arrows of Ulysses. — Their Ineffectual Attempts to bend the Bow. 
— Management of Ulysses to obtain the Bow, which he bends with 
Ease, and sends an Arrow through the twelve Rings set up in a Row 
"for the Purpose . . . . . . . . . .214 

BOOK XXII. 

DEATH OF THE SUITORS. 

Antinoiis slain by an Arrow from the Bow of Ulysses, who now declares 
himself, and begins the Slaughter. — Arms brought to him and to Eu- 
masus and Philcetius by Telemachus. — Arms brought to the Suitors by 
Melanthius the Goatherd. — Appearance of Pallas in the Shape of Men- 
tor. — Death of all the Suitors. — Medon and Phemius spared. — The 
Unfaithful Serving- Women hanged ....... 237 

BOOK XXIII. 

ULYSSES AND PENELOPE AFTER THE SLAUGHTER. 
Descent of Penelope to the Hall. — Her Doubts of the Identity of Ulysses 
removed by Evident Tokens given by Ulysses. — Her Transport at their 
Removal. — His Narrative of his Adventures. — Departure of Ulysses 
with his Son, the Herdsman, and the Swineherd, to the Country. . 263 

BOOK XXIV. 

CONCLUSION. 

The Souls of the Suitors conducted to Hades by Mercury. — Agamemnon 
and Achilles in Hades. — Their Meeting with the Souls of the Suitors, 
and Narrative of Amphimedon. — Meeting and Mutual Recognition of 
Ulysses and his Father in the Orchard at Ithaca. — Insurrection of the 
Ithacans, with Eupeithes, the Father of Antinoiis, at their Head. — The 
Revolt quelled, Eupeithes slain by Laertes, and a lasting Peace made 
between Ulysses and his Subjects ....... 283 



THE ODYSSEY. 

BOOK XIII. 

T T E spake, and all within those shadowy halls 

Were silent ; all were held in mute delight. 
Alcinoiis then took up the word and said : — 
" Since thou hast come, Ulysses, as a guest, 
To this high pile and to these brazen rooms, s 

So long a sufferer, thou must not depart 
Upon thy homeward way a wanderer still. 
And this let me enjoin on each of you 
Who in this palace drink at our repasts 
The choice red wine, and listen to the bard : 10 

Already in a polished chest are laid 
Changes of raiment, works of art in gold, 
And other gifts, which the Phaeacian chiefs 
Have destined for our guest ; now let us each 
Bestow an ample tripod and a vase, >5 



2 The Odyssey. 

And we in an assembly of the realm 

Will see the cost repaid, since otherwise 

Great would the burden be that each must bear." 

So spake Alcinoiis ; they approved, and sought 
Their homes to sleep, but when the child of Dawn, zo 
The rosy-fingered Morn, appeared, they came, 
All bringing to the ship their gifts of brass 
In honor of the guest. The mighty prince 
Alcinoiis, going through the ship, bestowed 
The whole beneath the benches, that no one 25 

Of those who leaned to pull the oar might thence 
Meet harm or hindrance. Then they all went back 
To the king's palace, and prepared a feast. 

The mighty prince Alcinoiis offered up 
For them an ox to cloud-compelling Jove, 3° 

The son of Saturn, ruler over all. 
They burned the thighs, and held high festival, 
And all was mirth. Divine -Demodocus 
The bard, whom all men reverenced, sang to them. 
Meantime Ulysses often turned to look 35 

At the bright Sun, and longed to see him set, 
So eager was the hero to set sail 
Upon his homeward way. As when a swain 
Awaits his evening meal, for whom all day 



Book xiii. 3 

Two dark-brown steers have dragged the solid plough 40 

Through fallow grounds, and welcome is the hour 

Of sunset, calling him to his repast, 

And wearily he walks with failing knees, 

So welcome to Ulysses did the light 

Of day go down. Then did he hold discourse 45 

With the Phasacians, lovers of the sea, 

And chiefly with Alcinoiis, speaking thus: — 

" O monarch most illustrious of thy race, 
Alcinoiis, now when ye have duly poured 
Wine to the gods, be pleased to send me hence 5° 

In peace, and fare ye well ! All that my heart 
Could wish have ye provided bounteously, — 
An escort and rich gifts ; and may the gods 
Bestow their blessing with them ! May I meet 
My blameless wife again, and find my friends 55 

Prosperous ! And ye whom I shall leave, behind, 
Long may ye make the wives of your young years 
And children happy ! May the gods vouchsafe 
To crown with every virtue you and them, 
And may no evil light upon your isle ! " 60 

He spake; the assembly all approved his words, 
And bade send forth the stranger on his way, 
Who spake so nobly. Then the mighty prince 



4 The Odyssey. 

Alcinoiis turned, and to the herald said : — 

" Now mix the wine, Pontonoiis, in a jar, <*5 

And bear a part to all beneath our roof, 
That we with prayers to Father Jupiter 
May send the stranger to his native land." 

He spake ; Pontonoiis mingled for the guests 
The generous wine, and went with it to each, 7° 

Who poured it on the ground, from where they sat, 
To all the dwellers of the ample heaven ; 
And then the great Ulysses, rising up, 
Placed the round goblet in Arete's hands, 
And thus bespake the queen with winged words : — 75 

" Farewell, O queen, through the long years, till age 
And death, which are the lot of all, shall come. 
Now I depart, but mayst thou here, among 
Thy people, and the children of thy love, 
And King Alcinoiis, lead a happy life ! " 80 

So spake the high-born chieftain, and withdrew, 
And crossed the threshold. King Alcinoiis sent 
A herald with him to direct his way 
To the fleet ship and border of the deep. 
Arete also sent her servant-maids, — 85 

One bearing a fresh cloak and tunic, one 
A coffer nobly wrought, and yet a third 



Book xiii. 5 

Bread and red wine ; and when they reached the ship 

Beside the sea, the diligent crew received 

Their burdens, and bestowed within the hold 90 

The food and drink, but spread upon the deck 

And at the stern a mat and linen sheet, 

That there Ulysses undisturbed might sleep. 

He went on board and silently lay down, 

While all the rowers in due order took 95 

Their seats upon the benches. Loosing first 

The hawser from the perforated rock, 

They bent them to their task, and flung the brine 

Up from the oar, while on the chieftain's lids 

Lighted a sweet and deep and quiet sleep, 100 

Most like to death. As, smitten by the lash, 

Four harnessed stallions spring on high and dart 

Across the plain together ; so the prow 

Rose leaping forward, while behind it rolled 

A huge dark billow of the roaring sea. 105 

Safely and steadily the galley ran, 

Nor could a falcon, swiftest of the birds, 

Have kept beside it, with such speed it flew, 

Bearing a hero who was like the gods 

In wisdom, and whose sufferings in the wars "o 

And voyages among the furious waves 



6 The Odyssey. 

Were great and many, though he slumbered now 
In peace, forgetful of misfortunes past. 

Now when that brightest star, the harbinger 
Of Morning, daughter of the Dawn, arose, "5 

The bark had passed the sea, and reached the isle. 

A port there is in Ithaca, the haunt 
Of Phorcys, Ancient of the Sea. Steep shores 
Stretch inward toward each other, and roll back 
The mighty surges which the hoarse winds hurl i»o 

Against them from the ocean, while within 
Ships ride without their hawsers when they once 
Have passed the haven's mouth. An olive-tree 
With spreading branches at the farther end 
Of that fair haven stands, and overbrows 1*5 

A pleasant shady grotto of the nymphs 
Called Naiads. Cups and jars of stone are ranged 
Within, and bees lay up their honey there. 
There from their spindles wrought of stone the nymphs 
Weave their sea-purple robes, which all behold 130 

With wonder ; there are ever-flowing springs. 
Two are the entrances : one toward the north 
By which men enter ; but a holier one 
Looks toward the south, nor ever mortal foot 
May enter there. By that way pass the gods. i 35 



Book xiii. 7 

They touched the land, for well they knew the spot. 
The galley, urged so strongly by the arms 
Of those who plied the oar, ran up the beach 
Quite half her length. And then the crew came forth 
From the good ship, and first they lifted out 14° 

Ulysses with the linen and rich folds 
Of tapestry, and laid him on the sands 
In a deep slumber. Then they also took 
The presents from the hold, which, as he left 
Their isle, the princes of Phaeacia gave 145 

By counsel of wise Pallas. These they piled 
Close to the olive-tree, without the way, 
That none, in passing, ere Ulysses woke, 
Might do their owner wrong. Then homeward sailed 
The crew ; but Neptune, who could not forget 15° 

The threats which he had uttered long before 
Against the godlike chief Ulysses, thus 
Sought to explore the will of Jupiter : — 

" O Father Jove ! I shall no more be held 
In honor with the gods, since mortal men, 155 

The people of Phaeacia, though their race 
Is of my lineage, do not honor me. 
I meant Ulysses should not reach his home 
Save with much suffering, though I never thought 



8 The Odyssey. 

To hinder his return, for thou hadst given iso 

Thy promise and thy nod that it should be. 

Yet these Phasacians, in a gallant bark, 

Have borne him o'er the deep, and, while he slept, 

Have laid him down in Ithaca, and given 

Large gifts, abundant store of brass and gold, 165 

And woven work, more than he could have brought 

From captured Ilium, if he had returned 

Safely, with all his portion of the spoil." 

Then cloud-compelling Jupiter replied : 
" Earth-shaker, ruler of a mighty realm ! 17° 

What hast thou said ? The gods deny thee not 
Due honor ; perilous it were for them 
To show contempt for one who stands in age 
And might above them all. But if among 
The sons of men be one who puts such trust 17s 

In his own strength as not to honor thee, 
Do as seems good to thee, and as thou wilt." 

Promptly the god who shakes the shores replied : 
"What thou dost bid me I would do at once, 
But that I fear and would avoid thy wrath. 180 

I would destroy that fair Phceacian bark 
In its return across the misty sea 
From bearing home Ulysses, that no more 



Book xiii. 9 

May the Phaeacians lend an escort thus 

To wandering men, and I would also cause 185 

A lofty mount to rise and hide their town." 

Then spake again the Cloud-compeller Jove : 
" Thus were it best, my brother : when the crowd 
Of citizens already see the ship 

Approaching, then transform it to a rock 190 

In semblance of a galley, that they all 
May gaze in wonder ; thus wilt thou have caused 
A lofty mount to stand before their town." 

This when the shaker of the shores had heard, 
He flew to Scheria, the Phasacian isle, 19s 

And stood, until that galley, having crossed 
The sea, came swiftly scudding. He drew near 
And smote it with his open palm, and made 
The ship a rock, fast rooted in the bed 
Of the deep sea, and then he went his way. aoo 

Then winged words were spoken in that throng 
Of the Phaeacians, wielders of long oars, 
And far renowned in feats of seamanship. 
And, looking on each other, thus they said : — 

" Ha ! what has stayed our good ship on the sea ? 205 
This moment we beheld her hastening home." 

'T was thus they talked, unweeting of the cause. 



IO 



The Odyssey. 



But then Alcinoiis to the assembly said : — 
"Yes! now I call to mind the ancient words 

Of prophecy, — my father's, — who was wont «o 

To say that Neptune sorely is displeased 

That we should give to every man who comes 

Safe escort to his home. In coming times, — 

Such was my father's prophecy, — the god 

Would yet destroy a well-appointed bark "5 

Of the Phasacians on the misty deep 

Returning from an escort, and would cause 

A lofty mount to stand before our town. 

So prophesied the aged man ; his words 

Are here fulfilled. Now do as I appoint, "° 

And let us all obey. Henceforth refrain 

From bearing to their homes the strangers thrown 

Upon our coast ; and let us sacrifice 

To Neptune twelve choice bullocks of the herd, 

That he may pity us, nor hide our town "5 

With a huge mountain from the sight of men." 

He spake, and they were awed and straightway brought 

The bullocks for the sacrifice. So prayed 

To sovereign Neptune the Phasacian chiefs 

And princes, standing round the altar-fires. 23° 

Now woke the great Ulysses from his sleep 



Book xiii. ii 

In his own land, and yet he knew it not. 

Long had he been away, and Pallas now, 

The goddess-child of Jove, had cast a mist 

Around him, that he might not yet be known 23s 

To others, and that she might tell him first 

What he should learn ; nor even might his wife, 

Nor friends, nor people, know of his return, 

Ere he avenged upon the suitor crew 

His wrongs, and therefore all things wore to him 24° 

Another look, — the footways stretching far, 

The bights where ships were moored, the towering rocks, 

And spreading trees. He rose and stood upright, 

And gazed upon his native coast and wept, 

And smote his thigh, and said in bitter grief: — 245 

" Ah me ! what region am I in, among 
What people ? lawless, cruel, and unjust ? 
Or are they hospitable men, who fear 
The gods ? And where shall I bestow these goods, 
And whither go myself? Would that they all *s° 

Were still with the Phasacians, and that I 
Had found some other great and mighty king 
Kindly to welcome me, and send me back 
To my own land. I know not where to place 
These treasures, and I must not leave them here, *55 



12 The Odyssey. 

Lest others come and seize them as a spoil. 

Nay, these Phasacian chiefs and counsellors 

Were not, in all things, either wise or just. 

They gave their word to land me on the coast 

Of pleasant Ithaca, and have not kept 26a 

Their promise. O, may Jove avenge this wrong ! 

He who protects the suppliant, who beholds 

All men with equal eye, and punishes 

The guilty. Now will I review my stores 

And number them again, that I may see 265 

If those who left me here have taken aught." 

Thus having said, he numbered all his gifts, — 
Beautiful tripods, caldrons, works of gold, " 
And gorgeous woven raiment ; none of these 
Were wanting. Then he pined to see again 370 

His native isle, and slowly paced the beach 
Of the loud sea, lamenting bitterly. 
There Pallas came to meet him in the shape 
Of a young shepherd, delicately formed, 
As are the sons of kings. A mantle lay 275 

Upon her shoulder in rich folds ; her feet 
Shone in their sandals : in her hand she bore 
A javelin. As Ulysses saw, his heart 
Was glad within him, and he hastened on, 



Book xiii. 13 

And thus accosted her with winged words : — *8o 

" Fair youth, who art the first whom I have met 
Upon this shore, I bid thee hail, and hope 
Thou meetest me with no unkind intent. 
Protect what thou beholdest here and me ; 
I make my suit to thee as to a god, 185 

And come to thy dear knees. And tell, I pray, 
That I may know the truth, what land is this ? 
What people ? who the dwellers ? may it be 
A pleasant isle, or is it but the shore 
Of fruitful mainland shelving to the sea ? " 29° 

And then the goddess, blue-eyed Pallas, said : — 
" Of simple mind art thou, unless perchance 
Thou comest from afar, if thou dost ask 
What country this may be. It is not quite 
A nameless region ; many know it well 29s 

Of those who dwell beneath the rising sun, 
And those, behind, in Evening's dusky realm. 
Rugged it is, and suited ill to steeds, 
Yet barren it is not, though level grounds 
Are none within its borders. It is rich 3°° 

In corn and wine, for seasonable rains 
And dews refresh its soil. Large flocks of goats 
And herds of beeves are pastured here ; all kinds 



14 The Odyssey. 

Of trees are in its forests, and its springs 

Are never dry. The fame of Ithaca,. 3°5 

Stranger, has travelled to the Trojan coast, 

Though that, I hear, lies far away from Greece." 

She spake ; Ulysses, the great sufferer, 
Rejoiced to be in his own land, whose name 
Pallas, the child of asgis-bearing Jove, 3™ 

Had just now uttered. Then with winged words 
He spake, but not the truth ; his artful speech 
Put that aside, for ever in his breast 
The power of shrewd invention was awake : — 

" In the broad fields of Crete, that lie far off 315 

Beyond the sea, I heard of Ithaca, 
To which I now am come with these my goods. 
I left as many for my sons and fled, 
For I had slain Orsilochus, the fleet 

Of foot, the dear son of Idomeneus, 320 

Who overcame by swiftness in the race 
The foremost runners in the realm of Crete. 
He sought to rob me wholly of my share 
Of Trojan spoil, for which I had endured 
Hardships in war with heroes, and at sea 325 

Among the angry waves. The cause was this : 
I would not in the siege of Troy submit 



Book xiii. 15 

To serve his father, but, apart from him, 

I led a troop, companions of my own. 

The youth returning from the fields I met, 330 

And smote him with the spear, — for near the way 

I lay in ambush with a single friend. 

A night exceeding dark was in the sky ; 

No human eye beheld, nor did he know 

Who took his life. When I had slain him thus 335 

With the sharp spear, I hastened to a ship 

Of the Phoenicians, and besought their aid, 

And gave them large reward, and bade them steer 

To Pylos, bearing me, and leave me there, 

Or where the Epeians hold the hallowed coast 34° 

Of Elis. But the force of adverse winds 

Drove them unwilling thence ; they meant no fraud. 

We wandered hither, just at night we came ; 

And rowing hard, the seamen brought their ship 

Within th£ port. ' No word was said of food, 34s 

Though great our need. All disembarked in haste 

And lay upon the shore. Deep was the sleep 

That stole upon my weary limbs. The men 

Took from the hold my goods, and, bearing them 

To where I slumbered on the sand, set sail 35° 

For populous Sidonia, leaving me 



1 6 The Odyssey. 

Here quite alone with sorrow in my heart." 

He spake ; the blue-eyed goddess, Pallas, smiled, 
And touched the chief caressingly. She seemed 
A beautiful and stately woman now, 355 

Such as are skilled in works of rare device, 
And thus she said to him in winged words : — 

" Full shrewd were he, a master of deceit, 
Who should surpass thee in the ways of craft, 
Even though he were a god, — • thou unabashed 36° 

And prompt with shifts, and measureless in wiles ! 
Thou canst not even in thine own land refrain 
From artful figments and misleading words, 
As thou hast practised from thy birth. But now 
Speak we of other matters, for we both 365 

Are skilled in stratagem. Thou art the first 
Of living men in counsel and in speech, 
And I am famed for foresight and for craft 
Among the immortals. Dost thou not yet know 
Pallas Athene, child of Jove, whose aid 37° 

Is present to defend thee in all time 
Of peril, and but lately gained for thee 
The favor of the whole Phasacian race. 
And hither am I come to frame for thee 
Wise counsels, and to hide away the stores 375 



Book xiii. 17 

Given by the opulent Phasacian chiefs 

At thy departure. I shall also tell 

What thou must yet endure beneath the roof 

Of thine own palace, by the will of fate. 

Yet bear it bravely, since thou must, nor speak 38° 

To any man or woman of thyself 

And of thy wandering hither, but submit 

To many things that grieve thee, silently, 

And bear indignities from violent men." 

Ulysses, the sagacious, thus rejoined : 3*5 

" O goddess, it is hard for mortal man 
To know thee when he meets thee, though his sight 
Be of the sharpest, for thou puttest on 
At pleasure any form. Yet this I know, 
That thou wert kind to me when we, the sons 39° 

Of Greece, were warring in the realm of Troy. 
But when we had o'erthrown the lofty town 
Of Priam, and embarked, and when some god 
Had scattered the Achaians, after that, 
Daughter of Jove, I never saw thee more, — 39s 

Never perceived thee entering my bark 
And guarding me from danger, — but I roamed 
Ever from place to place, my heart weighed down 
By sorrow, till the gods delivered me, 



1 8 The Odyssey. 

And till thy counsels in the opulent realm 400 

Of the Phsacians brought my courage back, 

And thou thyself didst guide me to the town. 

And now in thy great father's name I pray, — 

For yet I cannot think, that I am come 

To pleasant Ithaca, but have been thrown 405 

Upon some other coast, and fear that thou 

Art jesting with me, and hast spoken thus 

But to deceive me, — tell me, is it true 

That I am in my own beloved land ? " 

And then the goddess, blue-eyed Pallas, said : 410 

" Such ever are thy thoughts, and therefore I 
Must not forsake thee in thy need. I know 
How prompt thy speech, how quick thy thought, how 

shrewd 
Thy judgment. If another man had come 
From such long wanderings, he had flown at once 415 

Delighted to his children and his wife 
In his own home. But thou desirest not 
To ask or hear of them till thou hast put 
Thy consort to the trial of her truth, — 
Her who now sits within thy halls and waits 420 

In vain for thee, and in perpetual grief 
And weeping wears her nights and days away. 



Book xni. 19 

I never doubted — well, in truth, I knew 

That thou, with all thy comrades lost, wouldst reach 

Thy country, but I dreaded to withstand 4*5 

My father's brother Neptune, who was wroth, 

And fiercely wroth, for that thou hadst deprived 

His well-beloved son of sight. But now 

Attend, and I will show thee Ithaca 

By certain tokens ; mark them and believe. 430 

The port of Phorcys, Ancient of the Deep, 

Is here ; and there the spreading olive-tree, 

Just at the haven's head ; and, close beside, 

The cool dark grotto, sacred to the nymphs 

Called Naiads, — a wide-vaulted cave where once 43s 

Thou earnest oft with chosen hecatombs, 

An offering to the nymphs, — and here thou seest 

The mountain Neritus with all his woods." 

So spake the goddess, and dispersed the mist, 
And all the scene appeared. Ulysses saw 44° 

Well pleased, rejoicing in his own dear land, 
And, stooping, kissed the bountiful earth, and raised 
His hands, and thus addressed the nymphs in prayer : — 

" Nymphs, Naiads, born to Jove, I did not hope 
To be with you again. With cheerful prayers 44s 

I now salute you. We shall bring you soon 



20 The Odyssey. 

Our offerings, as of yore, if graciously 

Jove's daughter, huntress-queen, shall grant me yet 

To live, and bless my well-beloved son." 

And then the goddess, blue-eyed Pallas, said : 45° 

" Be of good cheer, and let no anxious thought 
Disturb thy mind. Let us bestir ourselves 
To hide away the treasures thou hast brought 
Within this hallowed grot in some recess 
Where they may lie in safety ; afterward 455 

Will we take counsel what should next be done." 

The goddess said these words, and took her way 
Into the shadowy cavern, spying out 
Its hiding-places; while Ulysses brought 
The treasures thither in his arms, — the gold, 460 

The enduring brass, the raiment nobly wrought, — 
Which the Phasacians gave him. These they laid 
Together in due order ; Pallas then, 
The daughter of the iEgis-bearer Jove, 
Closed up the opening with a massive rock. 465 

Then, sitting by the sacred olive-tree, 
They plotted to destroy the haughty crew 
Of suitors, and the blue-eyed Pallas said : — 

" O nobly born, and versed in many wiles, 
Son of Laertes ! now the hour is come 470 



Book XIII. 21 

To think how thou shalt lay avenging hands 

Upon the shameless crew who, in thy house, 

For three years past have made themselves its lords, 

And wooed thy noble wife and brought her gifts, 

While, pining still for thy return, she gave 475 

Hopes to each suitor, and by messages 

Made promises to all, though cherishing 

A different purpose in her secret heart." 

Ulysses, the sagacious, answered her : 
" Ah me, I should have perished utterly, 480 

By such an evil fate as overtook 
Atrides Agamemnon, in the halls 
Of my own palace, but for thee, whose words, 
O goddess, have revealed what I should know. 
Now counsel me how I may be avenged. 485 

Be ever by my side, and strengthen me 
With courage, as thou didst when we o'erthrew 
The towery crest of Ilium. Would thou wert 
Still my ally, as then ! I would engage, 
O blue-eyed Pallas, with three hundred foes, 49° 

If thou, dread goddess, wouldst but counsel me." 

And then the blue-eyed Pallas spake again : 
" I will be present with thee. When we once 
Begin the work, thou shalt not leave my sight ; 



22 The Odyssey. 

And many a haughty suitor with his blood 495 

And brains shall stain thy spacious palace floor. 

Now will I change thine aspect, so that none 

Shall know thee. I will wither thy fair skin, 

And it shall hang on crooked limbs ; thy locks 

Of auburn I will cause to fall away, s°° 

And round thee fling a cloak which all shall see 

With loathing. I will make thy lustrous eyes 

Dull to the sight, and thus shalt thou appear 

A squalid wretch to all the suitor train, 

And to thy wife, and to the son whom thou s°5 

Didst leave within thy palace. Then at first 

Repair thou to the herdsman, him who keeps 

Thy swine ; for he is loyal, and he loves 

Thy son and the discreet Penelope. 

There wilt thou find him as he tends his swine, s«° 

That find their pasturage beside the rock 

Of Corax, and by Arethusa's fount. 

On nourishing acorns they are fed, and drink 

The dark clear water, whence the flesh of swine 

Is fattened. There remain, and carefully s*$ 

Inquire of all that thou wouldst know, while I, 

Taking my way to Sparta, the abode 

Of lovely women, call Telemachus, 



Book xiii. 23 

Thy son, Ulysses, who hath visited 

King Menelaus in his broad domain, 520 

To learn if haply thou art living yet." 

Ulysses, the sagacious, answered her : 
" Why didst not thou, to whom all things are known, 
Tell him concerning me ? Must he too roam 
And suffer on the barren deep, and leave 525 

To others his estates, to be their spoil ? " 

And then the blue-eyed goddess spake again : 
" Let not that thought distress thee. It was I 
Who sent him thither, that he might deserve 
The praise of men. No evil meets him there ; 53° 

But in the halls of Atreus' son he sits, 
Safe mid the abounding luxuries. 'T is true 
That even now the suitors lie in wait, 
In their black ship, to slay him ere he reach 
His native land ; but that will hardly be 535 

Before the earth shall cover many a one 
Of the proud suitors who consume thy wealth." 

So Pallas spake, and touched him with her wand, 
And caused the blooming skin to shrivel up 
On his slow limbs, and the fair hair to fall, 540 

And with an old man's wrinkles covered all 
His frame, and dimmed his lately glorious eyes. 



24 The Odyssey. 

Another garb she gave, — a squalid vest ; 

A ragged, dirty cloak, all stained with smoke ; 

And over all the huge hide of a stag, 54s 

From which the hair was worn. A staff, beside, 

She gave, and shabby scrip with many a rent, 

Tied with a twisted thong. This said and done, 

They parted ; and the goddess flew to seek 

Telemachus in Sparta's sacred town. 55° 



BOOK XIV. 

~]pHEN from the haven up the rugged path 
Ulysses went among the woody heights. 
He sought the spot where Pallas bade him meet 
The noble swineherd, who of all that served 
The great Ulysses chiefly had in charge s 

To bring the day's supplies. He found him there 
Seated beneath the portico, before 
His airy lodge, that might be seen from far, 
Well built and spacious, standing by itself. 
Eumasus, while his lord was far away, 10 

Had built it, though not bidden by the queen 
Nor old Laertes, with the stones he drew 
From quarries thither. Round it he had set 
A hedge of thorns, encircling these with stakes 
Close set and many, cloven from the heart 15 

Of oak. Within that circuit he had made 
Twelve sties, beside each other, for the swine 
To lie in. Fifty wallowed in each sty, 



26 The Odyssey. 

All females ; there they littered. But the males 

Were fewer, and were kept without ; and these « 

The suitor train made fewer every day, 

Feeding upon them, for Eumsus sent 

Always the best of all his fading herd. 

These numbered twice nine score. Beside them slept 

Four mastiffs, which the master swineherd fed, *5 

Savage as wolves. Eumasus to his feet 

Was fitting sandals, which he carved and shaped 

From a stained ox-hide, while the other hinds 

Were gone on different errands, — three to drive 

The herds of swine, — a fourth was sent to take 3" 

A fading to the city, that the crew 

Of arrogant suitors, having offered him 

In sacrifice, might feast upon his flesh. 

The loud-mouthed dogs that saw Ulysses come 
Ran toward him, fiercely baying. He sat down 35 

At once, through caution, letting fall his staff 
Upon the ground, and would have suffered there 
Unseemly harm, within his own domain, 
But then the swineherd, following with quick steps, 
Rushed through the vestibule, and dropped the hide. 4° 
He chid the dogs and, pelting them with stones, 
Drave them asunder, and addressed the king : — 



Book xiv. 27 

" O aged man, the mastiffs of the lodge 
Had almost torn thee, and thou wouldst have cast 
Bitter reproach upon me. Other griefs 45 

And miseries the gods have made my lot. 
Here sorrowfully sitting I lament 
A godlike master, and for others tend 
His fading swine ; while, haply hungering 
For bread, he wanders among alien men 5° 

In other kingdoms, if indeed he lives 
And looks upon the sun. But follow me, 
And come into the house, that there, refreshed 
With food and wine, old man, thou mayst declare 
Whence thou dost come and what thou hast endured." ss 

So the good swineherd spake, and led the way 
Into the lodge, and bade his guest sit down, 
And laid thick rushes for his seat, and spread 
On these a wild goat's shaggy hide to make 
A soft and ample couch. Rejoiced to meet 60 

So kind a welcome, thus Ulysses spake : — 

" May Jupiter and all the deathless gods 
Bestow on thee, my host, in recompense 
Of this kind welcome, all thy heart's desire ! " 

And then, Eumasus, thou didst answer thus : 65 

" My guest, it were not right to treat with scorn 



28 The Odyssey. 

A stranger, though he were of humbler sort 

Than thou, for strangers and the poor are sent 

By Jove ; our gifts are small, though gladly given, 

As it must ever be with those who serve 7° 

Young masters, whom they fear. The gods themselves 

Prevent, no doubt, the safe return of him 

Who loved me much, and would ere this have given 

What a kind lord is wont to give his hind, — 

A house, a croft, the wife whom he has wooed, 75 

Rewarding faithful services which God 

Hath prospered, as he here hath prospered mine. 

Thus would my master, had he here grown old, 

Have recompensed my toils ; but he is dead. 

O that the house of Helen, for whose sake 80 

So many fell, had perished utterly! 

For he went forth at Agamemnon's call, 

Honoring the summons, and on Ilium's coast, 

Famed for its coursers, fought the sons of Troy." 

He spake, and girt his tunic round his loins, 85 

And hastened to the sties in which the herds 
Of swine were lying. Thence he took out two 
And slaughtered them, and singed them, sliced the flesh, 
And fixed it upon spits, and, when the whole 
Was roasted, brought and placed it reeking hot, 9° 



Book xiv. 29 

Still on the spits and sprinkled with white meal, 

Before Ulysses. Then he mingled wine 

Of delicate flavors in a wooden bowl, 

And opposite Ulysses sat him down, 

And thus with kindly words bespake his guest : — 95 

" Feast, stranger, on these porkers. We who serve 
May feed on them ; it is the suitor train 
That banquet on the fatted swine, — the men 
Who neither fear heaven's anger nor are moved 
By pity. The great gods are never pleased 100 

With violent deeds ; they honor equity 
And justice. Even those who land as foes 
And spoilers upon foreign shores, and bear 
Away much plunder by the will of Jove, 
Returning homeward with their laden barks, 105 

Feel, brooding heavily upon their minds, 
The fear of vengeance. But these suitors know — 
For haply they have heard some god declare — 
That he, the king, is dead ; they neither make 
Their suit with decency, nor will withdraw "° 

To their own homes, but at their ease devour 
His substance with large waste, and never spare. 
Of all the days and nights which Jupiter 
Gives to mankind is none when they require 



30 The Odyssey. 

A single victim only, or but two, "5 

For sacrifice, and lavishly they drain 

His wine-jars. Once large revenues were his. 

No hero on the dark-soiled continent 

Nor in the isle of Ithaca possessed 

Such wealth as he, nor even twenty men 120 

Together. Hear me while I give the amount. 

Twelve herds of kine that on the mainland graze 

Are his, as many flocks of sheep, of swine 

As many droves ; as many flocks of goats 

Are tended there by strangers, and by hinds, 125 

His servants. Here moreover, in the fields 

Beyond us, graze eleven numerous flocks 

Of goats, attended by his trusty men, 

Each one of whom brings daily home a goat, 

The finest of the fadings. I meantime 130 

Am keeper of these swine, and from the drove 

I choose and to the palace send the best." 

So spake the swineherd, while Ulysses ate 
The flesh with eager appetite, and drank 
The wine in silence, meditating woe I35 

To all the suitors. When the meal was o'er, 
And he was strengthened by the food, his host 
Filled up with wine the cup from which he drank, 



Book xiv. 31 

And gave it to Ulysses, who, well pleased, 

Received it, and with winged words replied : — 14° 

" What rich and mighty chief was he, my friend, 
Of whom thou speakest, and who purchased thee ? 
Thou sayest that he died to swell the fame 
Of Agamemnon. Tell his name, for I 
Perchance know somewhat of him. Jupiter 145 

And the great gods know whether I have seen 
The man, and have some tidings for thy ear ; 
For I have wandered over many lands." 

And then again the noble swineherd spake : 
" O aged man, no wanderer who should bring 15° 

News of Ulysses e'er would win his wife 
And son to heed the tale. For roving men, 
In need of hospitality, are prone 
To falsehood, and will never speak the truth. 
The vagabond who comes to Ithaca 155 

Goes straightway to my mistress with his lies. 
Kindly she welcomes him, and cherishes 
And questions him, while tears abundantly 
Fall from her lids, — such tears as women shed 
Whose lords have perished in a distant land. 160 

Thou too, old man, perchance, couldst readily 
Frame a like fable, if some one would give 



32 The Odyssey. 

A change of raiment for thy news, — a cloak 

And tunic. But the dogs and fowls of air 

Have doubtless fed upon the frame from which > 6 s 

The life has passed, and torn from off his bones 

The skin, or fishes of the deep have preyed 

Upon it, and his bones upon the shore 

Lie whelmed in sand. So is he lost to us, 

And sorrow is the lot of all his friends, 17° 

Mine most of all ; for nowhere shall I find 

So kind a master, though I were to come 

Into my father's and my mother's house, 

Where I was born and reared. Nor do I pine 

So much to look on them with my own eyes, 17s 

And in my place of birth, as I lament 

Ulysses lost. Though he be far away, 

Yet must I ever speak, O stranger guest, 

His name with reverence, for exceedingly 

He loved me and most kindly cared for me ; 18° 

And though he is to be with us no more, 

I hold him as an elder brother still." 

Ulysses, the great sufferer, thus replied : — 
" Since then, my friend, thou dost not say nor think 
That he will come again, nor wilt believe 185 

My words, I now repeat, but with an oath, 



Book xiv. 33 

Ulysses will return. Let this reward 

Be given for my good news : the very hour 

When he once more is in his house, bestow 

On me a comely change of raiment, — cloak 19° 

And tunic, — nor will I accept the gift, 

Though great my need, until he comes again. 

For as the gates of hell do I detest 

The man who, tempted by his poverty, 

Deceives with lying words. Now Jupiter 195 

Bear witness, and this hospitable board 

And hearth of good Ulysses where I sit, 

That all which I foretell will come to pass. 

This very year Ulysses will return. 

He, when this month goes out, and as the next »oo 

Is entering, will be here in his domain, 

To be avenged on those, whoe'er they be, 

That dare insult his wife and noble son." 

And then, Eumaeus, thou didst answer thus : 
" Old man, I shall not give thee that reward, *°s 

For never will Ulysses come again 
To his own palace. Drink thy wine in peace, 
And let us give our thoughts to other things. 
Remind me not of this again ; my heart 
Grows heavy in my bosom when I hear «° 

VOL. II. S 



34 The Odyssey. 

My honored master named. But leave the oath 

Unsworn, and may Ulysses come, as we 

Earnestly wish, — I and Penelope, 

And old Laertes, and the godlike youth 

Telemachus. And then, again, I bear "5 

Perpetual sorrow for Telemachus, 

My master's son, to whom the gods had given 

A generous growth like that of some young plant, 

And who, I hoped, would prove no less in worth 

Than his own father, and of eminent gifts «o 

In form and mind. Some god, perchance some man, 

Hath caused that mind to lose its equal poise, 

And he is gone to Pylos the divine 

For tidings of his father. Meanwhile here 

The arrogant suitors plan to lie in wait «s 

For him as he returns, that utterly 

The stock of great Arcesius from our isle 

May perish, and its name be heard no more. 

Speak we no more of him, be it his fate 

To fall or flee ; but O, may Saturn's son *3° 

Protect him with his arm ! And now, old man, 

Relate, I pray, thy fortunes ; tell me true, 

That I may know who thou mayst be, and whence 

Thou earnest, where thy city lies, and who 



Book xiv. 35 

Thy parents were, what galley landed thee *35 

Upon our coast, and how the mariners 
Brought thee to Ithaca, and of what race 
They claim to be ; for I may well suppose 
Thou hast not come to Ithaca on foot." 

Ulysses, the sagacious, answered him : 240 

" I will tell all and truly. Yet if here 
Were store of food, and wine for many days, 
And we might feast at ease within thy lodge 
While others labored, I should hardly end 
In a whole year the history of the woes 145 

Which I have borne, and of the many toils 
Which it hath pleased the gods to lay on me. 

" It is my boast that I am of the race 
Who dwell in spacious Crete, a rich man's son, 
Within whose palace many other sons 250 

Were born and reared, the offspring of his wife ; 
But me a purchased mother whom he made 
His concubine brought forth to him. And yet 
Castor Hylacides, from whom I sprang, 
Held me in equal favor with the rest ; 255 

And he himself was honored like a god 
Among the Cretan people, for his wealth 
And for his prosperous life and gallant sons. 



$6 The Odyssey. 

But fate and death o'ertook and bore him down 

To Pluto's realm, and his magnanimous sons 260 

Divided his large riches, casting lots. 

Small was the portion they assigned to me ; 

They gave a dwelling, but my valor won 

A bride, the daughter of a wealthy house, — 

For I was not an idler, nor in war 265 

A coward ; but all that is with the past, 

And thou, who seest the stubble now, mayst guess 

What was the harvest, ere calamities 

Had come so thick upon me. Once did Mars 

And Pallas lend me courage, and the power 27° 

To break through ranks of armed men. Whene'er 

I formed an ambush of the bravest chiefs, 

And planned destruction to the enemy, 

My noble spirit never set the fear 

Of death before me ; I was ever first *75 

To spring upon the foes, and with my spear 

To smite them as they turned their steps to flee. 

Such was I once in war ; to till the fields 

I never liked, nor yet the household cares 

By which illustrious sons are reared. I loved 280 

Ships well appointed, combats, polished spears 

And arrows. Things that others hold in dread 



Book xiv. sj 

Were my delight ; some god inclined to them 

My mind, • — so true it is that different men 

Rejoice in different labors. Ere the sons »8s 

Of Greece embarked for Troy, I served in war 

Nine times as leader against foreign foes, 

With troops and galleys under me, and then 

I prospered ; from the mass of spoil I chose 

The things that pleased me, and obtained by lot 19° 

Still other treasures. Thus my household grew 

In riches, and I was revered and great 

Among the Cretans. When all-seeing Jove 

Decreed the unhappy voyage to the coast 

Of Troy, they made the great Idomeneus 295 

And me commanders of the fleet. No power 

Had we — the public clamor was so fierce — 

To put the charge aside. Nine years we warred, — 

We sons of Greece, — and in the tenth laid waste 

The city of Priam, and embarked for home. 3°° 

Our fleets were scattered by the gods. For me 

Did all-disposing Jupiter ordain 

A wretched lot. But one short month I dwelt 

Happy among my children, with the wife 

Wedded to me in youth, and my large wealth. 3°s 

And then I planned a voyage to the coast 



38 The Odyssey. 

Of Egypt, with a gallant fleet, and men 

Of godlike valor. I equipped nine ships, 

And quickly came the people to embark. 

Six days on shore my comrades banqueted, 310 

And many a victim for the sacrifice 

And for the feast I gave ; the seventh we sailed 

From Crete's broad isle before a favoring wind 

That blew from the clear north, and easily 

We floated on as down a stream. No ship 315 

Was harmed upon its way ; in health and ease 

We sat, the wind and helmsmen guiding us, 

And came upon the fifth day to the land 

Of Egypt, watered by its noble streams. 

I bade my comrades keep beside our ships 3«> 

Upon the strand', and watch them well. I placed 

Sentries upon the heights. Yet confident 

In their own strength, and rashly giving way 

To greed, my comrades ravaged the fair fields 

Of the Egyptians, slew them, and bore off 3*5 

Their wives and little ones. The rumor reached 

The city soon ; the people heard the alarm 

And came together. With the early morn 

All the great plain was thronged with horse and foot, 

And gleamed with brass ; while Jove, the Thunderer, sent 



Book xiv. 39 

A deadly fear into our ranks, where none 331 

Dared face the foe. On every side was death. 

The Egyptians hewed down many with the sword, 

And some they led away alive to toil 

For them in slavery. To my mind there came 335 

A thought, inspired by Jove ; yet I could wish 

That I had met my fate, and perished there 

In Egypt, such have been my sorrows since. 

I took the well-wrought helmet from my head, 

And from my shoulders dropped the shield, and flung 34° 

The javelin from my hand, and went to meet 

The monarch in his chariot, clasped his knees 

And kissed them. He was moved to pity me, 

And spared me. In his car he seated me, 

And bore me weeping home. Though many rushed 34s 

At me with ashen spears, to thrust me through, — 

For furious was their anger, — he forbade. 

He feared the wrath of Jove, the stranger's friend 

And foe of wrong. Seven years I dwelt among 

The Egyptians, and I gathered in their land 35° 

Large wealth, for all were liberal of their gifts. 

But with the eighth revolving year there came 

A shrewd Phoenician, deep in guile, whose craft 

Had wrought much wrong to many. With smooth words 



4-0 The Odyssey. 

This man persuaded me to go with him 355 

Into Phoenicia, where his dwelling lay 
-And his possessions. With him I abode 
For one whole year ; and when its months and days 
Were ended, and another year began, 
He put me in a ship to cross the sea 360 

To Lybia. He had framed a treacherous plot, 
By making half the vessel's cargo mine, 
To lure me thither, and to sell me there 
For a large price. I went on board constrained, 
But with misgivings. Under a clear sky, 365 

With favoring breezes from the north, we ran 
O'er the mid sea, beyond the isle of Crete. 
When we had left the isle, and saw no land 
But only sky and sea, Saturnius bade 
A black cloud gather o'er our roomy ship. 37° 

The sea grew dark below. On high the God 
Thundered again and yet again, and sent 
A bolt into our ship, which, as it felt 
The lightning, reeled and shuddered, and was filled 
With sulphur-smoke. The seamen from the deck 37s 
Fell headlong, and were tossed upon the waves 
Like seamews round our galley, which the God 
Forbade them to regain. But Jupiter 



Book xiv. 41 

Gave to my hands, bewildered as I was, 

Our dark-prowed galley's mast, unbroken yet, 380 

That by its aid I might escape. I wound 

My arms around it, and the raging winds 

Swept me along. Nine days they bore me on, 

And on the tenth dark night a mighty surge 

Drifted me, as it rolled, upon the coast 385 

Of the Thesprotians. There the hero-king 

Of the Thesprotians freely sheltered me 

And fed me ; for his well-beloved son 

Had found me overcome with cold and toil, 

And took me by the hand and raised me up, 390 

And led me to his father's house, and gave 

Seemly attire, a tunic and a cloak. 

" There heard I of Ulysses. Pheidon told 
How he received him as a guest and friend, 
When on his homeward voyage. Then he showed 39s 
The wealth Ulysses gathered, brass and gold, 
And steel divinely wrought. That store might serve 
To feed, until ten generations pass, 
Another household. But the chief himself, 
So Pheidon said, was at Dodona then ; 400 

For he had gone to hear from the tall oak 
Of 'Jupiter the counsel of the God, 



VOL. II. 



42 The Odyssey. 

Whether to land in opulent Ithaca, 

After long years of absence, openly 

Or in disguise. The monarch took an oath 4=5 

In his own palace, pouring to the gods 

Their wine, that even- then the ship was launched, 

And the crew ready to attend him home. 

But me he first dismissed. There was a ship 

Of the Thesprotians just about to make 41° 

A voyage to Dulichium, rich in fields 

Of wheat. He bade them take me faithfully 

To King Acastus ; but another thought 

Found favor with the crew, a wicked scheme 

To plunge me deeper in calamity. 415 

And when our ship had sailed away from land, 

They hastened to prepare me for a life 

Of slavery. They took my garments off, 

Mantle and cloak, and clothed me in a vest 

And cloak, the very rags which thou dost see. 420 

The evening brought them to the pleasant fields 

Of Ithaca. They bound me in the ship 

With a strong cord, and disembarked, and took 

A hasty meal upon the ocean-side ; 

Easily did the gods unbind my limbs. 425 

I wrapped a tattered cloth about my head, 



Book xiv. 43 

And, slipping from the polished rudder, brought 

My bosom to the sea, and spread my hands, 

And swam away. I soon had left the crew 

At distance ; then I turned and climbed the shore, 43° 

Where it was dark with forest, and. lay close 

Within its shelter, while they wandered round 

And grumbled, but they ventured not to pass 

Into the island farther on their search. 

They turned, and went on board their roomy bark. 435 

Thus mightily the gods delivered me, 

And they have brought me to a wise man's lodge, 

And now I see it is my lot to live." 

Then thou, Eumsus, thus didst make reply : 
" Unhappy stranger, thou hast deeply moved 440 

My heart in telling all that thou hast borne, 
And all thy wanderings. Yet are some things wrong. 
Thou hast not spoken of Ulysses well. 
Why should a man like thee invent such tales, 
So purposeless ? Of one thing I am sure 44s 

Concerning his return, — the gods all hate 
My master, since they neither caused his death 
In the great war of Troy, nor, when the war 
Was over, suffered him to die at home, 
And in the arms of those who loved him most; 45° 



44 The Odyssey. 

For then would all the Greeks have reared to him 

A monument, and mighty would have been 

The heritage of glory for his son ; 

But now ingloriously the harpy brood 

Have torn him. I, apart among my swine, 455 

Go never to the town, unless, perchance, 

The sage Penelope requires me there, 

When some one comes with tidings from abroad. 

Then those who sorrow for their absent lord, 

And those who waste his substance, both inquire 460 

News of the king. For me, it suits me no*t 

Ever to ask for tidings, since the day 

When an iEtolian with a flattering tale 

Deceived me. He had slain a man, and came 

Wandering in many lands to my abode, 465 

And kindly I received him. He had seen 

He said, my master with Idomeneus, 

Among the Cretans, putting in repair 

His galleys, shattered by a furious storm, 

And in the summer time he would be here, 470 

Or in the autumn, bringing ample wealth, 

And his brave comrades with him. Seek not then 

O aged sufferer, whom some deity 

Has guided hither, to amuse my grief 



Book- xiv. 45 

With fictions that may bring back pleasant thoughts, 47s 
Since not for them I minister to thee 
And love thee, but through reverence for Jove, — 
The stranger's friend, — and pity for thyself." 

Ulysses, the sagacious, spake again : 
" Within thy bosom thou dost bear a heart 48° 

Of slow belief, since not the oath I take 
Persuades or even moves thee. Make we now 
A covenant, and let the gods who dwell 
Upon Olympus be our witnesses, 

That when thy master comes to this abode 4S5 

Thou wilt bestow a tunic and a cloak, 
And wilt despatch me clothed in seemly garb 
Hence to Dulichium, whither I would go. 
But if he come not as I have foretold, 
Then charge thy servants that they cast me down 49° 

From a tall rock, that never beggar more 
May think to cozen thee with lying tales." 

The noble swineherd answered him and said: 
" Great would my honor be, and I should gain 
Great praise for worth among the sons of men, 495 

If, having welcomed thee into my lodge 
And spread the board for thee, I took thy life ; 
Then boldly might I pray to Saturn's son. 



46 The Odyssey. 

But see, the supper hour is come, and soon 

Will my companions be within, and they 5°° 

Will make a liberal banquet ready here." 

Thus did the twain confer. Now came the swine, 
And those who tended them. They penned the herd 
In their enclosure, and a din of cries 

Rose as they entered. Then the swineherd called s°s 

To his companions : " Bring the best of all, 
And we will make an offering for the sake 
Of one who comes from far and is my guest. 
And we will also feast, for we have toiled 
Long time in tendance of this white-toothed herd, 51° 
And others waste, unpunished, what we rear." 

So spake he, and began to cleave the wood 
With the sharp steel ; the others chose and brought 
A fatted brawn, and placed him on the hearth. 
Nor was the swineherd careless of the rites S'5 

Due to the gods, — such was his piety. 
From off the white-toothed victim first he sheared 
The bristles of the forehead, casting them 
Into the flames, and prayed to all the gods 
For wise Ulysses and his safe return. 520 

Next, with a fragment of the oaken trunk 
Which he had just then cleft, he smote the boar, 



Book xiv. 47 

And the life left it. Then they cut its throat, 

And, having singed it, quickly hewed the parts 

Asunder, while the swineherd took and laid, 525 

On the rich fat, raw portions from the limbs 

For sacrifice, and other parts he cast, 

Sprinkled with flour of meal, into the flames ; 

The rest they duly sliced and fixed on spits, 

And roasted carefully, and drew it back, 530 

And heaped it on the board. And now arose 

The swineherd to divide the whole, for well 

He knew the duty of a host. He made 

Seven parts ; t and one he offered to the Nymphs, 

To Hermes, son of Maia, one, and both 53s 

With prayer ; the rest he set before the guests, 

But, honoring Ulysses, gave to him 

The white-toothed victim's ample chine. The king, 

The wise Ulysses, was well pleased, and said : — 

" Eumaeus, be thou ever dear to Jove 54° 

As to myself, since with thy benefits 
Thou freely honorest such a one as I." 

And thou, Eumasus, madest answer thus : 
" Eat, venerable stranger, and enjoy 

What is before us. At his pleasure God 54s 

Gives or withholds ; his power is over all." 



48 The Odyssey. 

He spake, and burned to the eternal gods 
The firstlings, and poured out the dark red wine, 
And to Ulysses, spoiler of walled towns, 
Who sat beside the table, gave the cup. 55° 

Meantime to each Mesaulius brought the bread, — 
A servant whom Eumaeus, while his lord 
Was far away, had taken for himself, 
Without the order of Penelope 

Or old Laertes ; from the Taphian tribe 555 

With his own goods he bought him. Now the guests 
Put forth their hands and shared the ready feast ; 
And when their thirst and hunger were appeased 
Mesaulius took the bread away, and all, 
Satiate with food and wine, lay down to rest. s 6 ° 

Then came the darkness on, without a moon ; 
And Jupiter the whole night long sent down 
The rain, and strong the showery west wind blew. 
And now to try the swineherd, if with all 
His kindly ministrations to his guest s 6 5 

He yet would spare to him his cloak, or bid 
Another do the like, Ulysses spake : — 

" Eumaeus, hearken thou, and all the rest, 
Thy comrades, while I utter boastful words. 
Wine makes me foolish, it can even cause 570 



Book xiv. 49 

The wise to sing and laugh a silly laugh 

And dance, and often to the lips it brings 

Words that were better left unsaid. But since 

I have begun to prattle, I will not 

Keep back my thought. I would I were as young 575 

And in the same full strength as when I formed 

Part of an ambush near the walls of Troy. 

The leaders were Ulysses, and the son 

Of Atreus, Menelaus, with myself 

The third, for they desired it. When we reached s g0 

The city and the lofty walls we lay 

Couched in a marshy spot among the reeds 

And thick-grown shrubs, with all our armor on. 

'T was an inclement night, and the north wind 

Blew bitter chill, the cold snow fell and lay 58s 

White like hoar-frost ; ice gathered on our shields. 

The rest had cloaks and tunics, and they slept 

At ease, their shoulders covered with their shields. 

I only, when I joined the squadron, left 

My cloak unwisely, for I had not thought 590 

Of such fierce cold. I went but with my shield 

And my embroidered girdle. When the night 

Was in its later watches, and the stars 

Were turning toward their set, I thus bespake 



50 The Odyssey. 

Ulysses near me, thrusting in his side 595 

My elbow, and he listened readily : — 

"'Son of Laertes, nobly born and wise! 
Ulysses, I shall not be long among 
The living; for I perish with the cold. 
I have no cloak ; some god misled my thought, 6°° 

So that I brought one garment and no more, 
And now I see there is no help for me.' 

" I spake, and instantly his mind conceived 
This stratagem, — such was his readiness 
In council and in battle, — and he said 605 

To me in a low voice : ' Be silent now, 
And let no others of the Achaians hear!' 
And leaning on his elbow thus he spake : — 

" 'Hear me, my friends: a dream has come from heaven 
Into my sleep. Far from our ships we lie; 610 

And now let some one haste to bear from us 
This word to Agamemnon, Atreus' son, 
The shepherd of the people, that he send 
More warriors to this ambush from the fleet.' 

" He spake, and Thoas instantly arose, — 615 

Andraemon's son, — and threw his purple cloak 
Aside, and hastened toward the fleet. I took 
Gladly the garment he had left, and lay 



Book xiv. 51 

Till Morning in her golden chariot came. 

And now I would that I were young again, 620 

And in the vigor of my prime, for then 

Some one among the swineherds in the stalls 

Would find, I think, a cloak for me, through love 

And reverence of such a man ; but now 

They hold me in slight favor, dressed in rags." 625 

And thus, Eumseus, thou didst make reply : 
" O aged man ! we see no cause of blame 
In thy recital, and of all thy words 
Not one is unbecoming or inapt. 

Thou shall not lack for garments, nor aught else 63° 

That any suppliant in his poverty 
Might hope for at our hands to-night. With morn 
Gird thou thy tatters on again ; for here 
We have not many cloaks, nor many a change 
Of raiment, — only one for each of us. 635 

But when the son of our Ulysses comes 
Again, he will provide thee with a cloak 
And tunic, and will send thee where thou wilt." 

He spake and rose, and made his guest a bed 
Close to the hearth, and threw on it the skins e 4 o 

Of sheep and goats, and there Ulysses lay, 
O'er whom the swineherd spread a thick large cloak, 



52 The Odyssey. 

Which he had often worn for a defence 
When a wild winter storm was in the air. 

Thus slept Ulysses with the young men near. 645 

A couch within, and distant from his charge, 
Pleased not the swineherd, who first armed himself, 
And then went forth. Ulysses gladly saw 
That while he was in distant lands his goods 
Were watched so faithfully. Eumasus hung 6 S o 

About his sturdy shoulders a sharp sword, 
And wrapped a thick cloak round him, tempest-proof, 
And took the hide of a huge pampered goat, 
And a well-pointed javelin for defence 
Both against dogs and men. So went he forth 655 

To take his rest where lay the white-toothed swine, 
Herded and slumbering underneath a rock, 
Whose hollow fenced them from the keen north wind. 



BOOK XV. 

HPHEN Pallas, hastening to the mighty realm 
Of Lacedasmon, sought the illustrious son 
Of great Ulysses, to remind the youth 
Of home, and bid him think of his return. 
She found Telemachus and Nestor's son s 

Upon their couches in the portico 
Of Menelaus, the renowned. Deep sleep 
Held Nestor's son ; but to Telemachus 
The welcome slumber came not, for his thoughts 
Uneasily through all the quiet night 10 

Dwelt on his father. Now beside his bed 
The blue-eyed Pallas took her stand and spake • — 

" Telemachus, it is no longer well 
That thou shouldst wander from thy home, and leave 
All thy possessions, and those arrogant men is 

That crowd thy halls. Beware, lest they devour 
Thy substance utterly, dividing all 
Among them, and this journey be for nought. 



54 The Odyssey. 

Make suit to Menelaus, great in war, 

Quickly to send thee home, that thou mayst join 20 

Thy blameless mother in thy halls ; for now 

Her father and her brothers counsel her 

To wed Eurymachus, whose gifts exceed 

Those of the other suitors, and besides 

He offers a yet richer bridal dower. 25 

It were not hard without thy leave to take 

Wealth from a palace. What a wife will do 

Thou knowest. 'T is her pleasure to increase 

The riches of the man whom she has wed. 

Care of her former children has she none, 30 
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

Nor memory of the husband whom she took 

While yet a maid, and who is in his grave ; 

Of these she never speaks. Return thou, then, 

And give thy goods in charge to one among 

The handmaids of thy household who shall seem 35 

The fittest for the trust, until the gods 

Bring thee a noble wife. Another word 

Have I for thee, and bear thou it in mind : 

The chief among the suitors in the strait 

Between the rugged Samos and the isle 40 

Of Ithaca are lurking, in the hope 

To slay thee on thy voyage home ; but this 



Book xv. 55 

I think they cannot do before the earth 

Hold many of the suitor-crew who make 

Thy wealth a spoil. Steer thou thy gallant bark 45 

Far from the isles ; sail only in the night. 

Some god, whoever it may be that keeps 

Watch over thee, will send a prosperous gale. 

When to the nearest shore of Ithaca 

Thou comest in thy ship, let it go on, 5° 

With all thy comrades, to the town, while thou 

Repairest to the keeper of thy swine, 

Whose heart is faithful to thee. There remain 

With him that night, and send him to the town 

With tidings to the sage Penelope 55 

That thou art come from Pylos and art safe." 

So having said, the goddess took her way 
Up to the Olympian height. Telemachus 
Touched with his heel and wakened Nestor's son 
From a soft slumber, and bespake him thus : — 6° 

" Rise, Nestor's son, Peisistratus, and bring 
The firm-paced steeds and yoke them to the car, 
And we will now set forth upon our way." 

And Nestor's son, Peisistratus, replied : 
" Telemachus, whatever be our haste, 65 

It were not well in darkness to begin 



56 The Odyssey. 

Our journey, and the morn will soon be here. 

Remain till Menelaus, Atreus' son, 

The hero mighty with the spear, shall come, 

And bring his gifts, and place them in our car, 7° 

And send us on our way with kindly words. 

Well does a guest remember all his days 

The generous host who shows himself his friend." 

He spake, and quickly on her car of gold 
Appeared the Morn. Then Menelaus came, 75 

The great in battle, from his couch beside 
The fair-haired Helen. When Telemachus 
Knew of the king's approach, the hero threw 
In haste his tunic o'er his noble form, 
And over his broad shoulders flung a cloak *o 

Of ample folds. Then, going forth, the son 
Of great Ulysses met the king and said : — 

" Atrides Menelaus, loved of Jove 
And sovereign of the people, send me hence, 
I pray, to the dear country of my birth, 85 

For earnestly I long to be at home." 

And Menelaus, great in war, replied : 
" Telemachus, I will not keep thee long, 
Since thou so much desirest to return. 
I am displeased with him who as a host 90 



Book xv. 57 

Is lavish of his love, for he will hate 

Beyond due measure ; best it is to take 

The middle way. It is alike a wrong 

To thrust the unwilling stranger out of doors, 

And to detain him when he longs to go. 95 

While he is with us we should cherish him, 

And, when he wishes, help him to depart. 

Remain until I bring thee worthy gifts 

And place them in thy chariot, that thine eyes 

May look on them ; and I will give command 1°° 

That in the palace here the women spread 

A liberal feast from stores that lie within. 

But if, in turning from thy course, thou choose 

To pass through Hellas and the midland tract 

Of Argos, I will yoke my steeds and go 105 

With thee, and show the cities thronged with men ; 

Nor will they send us empty-handed thence, 

But bring us gifts which we may bear away, — 

Tripod, perchance, or caldron wrought of brass, 

Perchance a pair of mules or golden cup." no 

Then spake discreet Telemachus in turn : 
" Atrides Menelaus, loved of Jove 
And sovereign of the people, rather far 
Would I return to my own home ; for there 



58 The Odyssey. 

Is no man left in charge of what is mine, »s 

And I must go, lest, while I vainly seek 

My father, I may perish, or may lose 

Some valued treasure from my palace rooms." 

The valiant Menelaus heard, and bade 
His wife and maidens spread without delay >»o 

A ready banquet from the stores within. 
Then Eteoneus from his morning sleep, 
Son of Boetheus, came, for very near 
His dwelling was. The sovereign bade him light 
A fire and roast the flesh, and he obeyed. us 

And then into the fragrant treasure-room 
Descended Menelaus, not alone ; 
Helen and Megapenthes went with him. 
And when they came to where the treasures lay, 
Atrides took a double goblet up, 13° 

And bade his son, young Megapenthes, bear 
A silver beaker thence, while Helen stood 
Beside the coffers where the embroidered robes 
Wrought by her hands were laid. The glorious dame 
Took one and brought it forth, most beautiful 13s 

In needlework, and amplest of them all. 
The garment glittered like a star, and lay 
Below the other robes. Then, passing through 



Book xv. 59 

The palace halls, they found Telemachus, 

And thus the fair-haired Menelaus spake : — 140 

" Telemachus, may Jove the Thunderer, 
Husband of Juno, grant thee to return 
According to thy wish ! I give thee here 
Of all the treasures which my house contains 
The fairest and most precious. I present 145 

A goblet all of silver, save the lips, 
And they are bound with gold ; it is the work 
Of Vulcan. Phaedimus the hero, king 
Of the Sidonians, gave it me when once 
His palace sheltered me. He gave it me «s° 

At parting, and I now would have it thine." 

Atrides spake, and_gave into his hands 
The double goblet. Megapenthes next 
Before him set the shining beaker wrought 
Of silver. Rosy Helen, holding up 155 

The robe, drew near, and spake to him and said : — 

" I also bring to thee, dear son, a gift, 
The work of Helen's hands, which thou shalt keep, 
In memory of her, until the day 

Of thy desired espousals, when thy bride 16° 

Shall wear it. Let it in the mean time lie 
Within thy halls, in thy dear mother's care ; 



60 The Odyssey. 

And mayst thou soon and happily arrive 
At thy fair palace and thy native coast." 

So spake she, placing in his hands the robe. 165 

He took it, and was glad. Peisistratus 
Was moved with wonder as he saw, and laid 
The presents in the car. The fair-haired king 
Then led them to the hall, and seated them 
On thrones and couches, where a maiden brought 17° 

Water in a fair golden ewer, and o'er 
A silver basin poured it for their hands, 
And near them set a table smoothly wrought. 
The matron of the palace brought them bread 
And. many a delicate dish to please the taste 17s 

From stores within the house. Then to the board 
Boetheus' son drew near and carved the meats, 
And gave to each a portion, while the son 
Of glorious Menelaus poured the wine. 
The guests put forth their hands and shared the food 180 
That lay prepared before them. When the calls 
Of thirst and hunger ceased, Telemachus 
And Nestor's famous son brought forth and yoked 
The steeds, and climbed into the sumptuous car, 
And drove from out the echoing portico. 185 

Atrides Menelaus, amber-haired, 



Book xv. 6 1 

Went forth with them, and, holding in his hand 

A golden cup of generous wine, poured out 

An offering for their voyage to the gods. 

Before the steeds he took his stand, and first 19° 

Drank from the cup, and then bespake the guests : — 

" Now fare ye well, young men, and when ye come 
To Nestor, shepherd of the people, give 
Greetings from me ; for he was kind to me 
As if he were a father, when the sons 19s 

Of Greece were warring in the realm of Troy." 

Then spake in turn discreet Telemachus : 
" Assuredly I shall relate to him, 
As soon as I am with him, all that thou, 

foster-child of Jove, hast bid me say ; 200 
And would to heaven I might as surely tell 

Ulysses in his palace, when again 

1 come to Ithaca, how welcome thou 
Hast made me here, and how I came away 

With treasures rich and many from thy court." *°s 

As thus he spake, an eagle to the right 
Appeared, that, flying, bore a large white goose, 
Clutched from the tame flock in the palace court ; 
And men and women ran the way he flew, 
And shouted after him. Before the steeds "° 



62 The Odyssey. 

Of the young men, and still on the right hand, 
The bird went sweeping on. They saw well pleased, 
And every heart was gladdened. To the rest 
Peisistratus, the son of Nestor, said : — 

" Now tell me, Menelaus, loved of Jove, »'5 

Prince of the people ! does the god who sends 
This portent mean the sign for us or thee ? " 

He spake ; and Menelaus, dear to Mars, 
Paused, thinking how to answer him aright, 
When thus the long-robed Helen interposed : — "° 

" Listen to me, and I will prophesy 
As the gods prompt me, and as I believe 
The event will be. Just as this eagle came 
From the wild hills, his birthplace and his haunt, 
And seized and bore away the water-fowl «s 

Reared near our halls, so will Ulysses come, 
After much hardship and long wanderings, 
To his own home, to be avenged ; perchance 
Already is at home, and meditates 
An evil end to all the suitor crew." 23° 

Then spake discreet Telemachus in turn : 
"May Juno's husband, Jove the Thunderer, 
So order the event, and I will there 
Make vows to thee as to a deity." 



Book xv. 63 

He spake, and touched the coursers with the lash ; 23s 
And through the city rapidly they went 
And toward the plain, and all day long they shook 
The yoke upon their necks. The sun went down ; 
The roads all lay in darkness as they came 
To Pheras, and the house of Diocles, h° 

Whose father was Orsilochus, and he 
The offspring of Alpheius. There that night 
They slept ; their host was liberal of his cheer. 
But when appeared the daughter of the Dawn, 
The rosy-fingered Morn, they yoked the steeds 245 

And climbed the sumptuous car, and drove afield 
From underneath the echoing portico. 
The son of Nestor plied the lash ; the steeds 
Flew not unwillingly, and quickly reached 
The lofty citadel of Pylos. There 25° 

Telemachus bespake his comrade thus : — 

" Wilt thou consent to do what I shall ask, 
O son of Nestor ? 'T is our boast that we 
Are friends because our fathers were ; besides, 
We are of equal age, and journeying thus 255 

Has made our friendship firmer. Take me not, 
O foster-child of Jove, beyond the spot 
Where lies my galley, lest against my will 



64 The Odyssey. 

The aged Nestor should detain me here 

Through kindness, when I needs must hasten home." 260 

He spake, and then the son of Nestor mused 
How what his friend desired might best be done. 
And this seemed wisest after careful thought : 
He turned the chariot to the ship and shore, 
And taking out the garments and the gold, — 165 

Beautiful gifts which Menelaus gave, — 
He put them in the galley's stern, and thus 
Bespake Telemachus with winged words : — 

" Embark in haste, and summon all thy crew 
On board before I reach my home and tell 270 

The aged king. I know how vehement 
His temper is ; he will not let thee go, 
But hastening hither, to enforce thy stay 
At Pylos, will not, I am sure, go back 
Without thee ; his displeasure will be great." 27s 

He spake, and toward the Pylian city turned 
His steeds with flowing manes, and quickly reached 
His home. Meantime Telemachus held forth 
To his companions, thus exhorting them : — 

" My friends, make ready all things in our ship 280 

And mount the deck, for we must now set sail." 

He spake, they hearkened and obeyed, and leaped 



Book xv. 65 

On board and manned the benches. While he thus 

Was hastening his departure, offering prayer 

And pouring wine to Pallas at the stern, ^5 

A stranger came, a seer, a fugitive 

From Argos, where his hand had slain a man. 

Melampus was his ancestor, who dwelt 

Some time in Pylos, mother of fair flocks, — 

Rich, and inhabiting a sumptuous house 29° 

Among the Pylians. Afterward he joined 

Another people, fleeing from his home 

And from the mighty Neleus, haughtiest 

Of living men, who, seizing his large wealth, 

Held it a year by force. Melampus lay *95 

Meantime within the house of Phylacus 

Fast bound, and suffering greatly, both because 

Of Neleus' daughter, and of his own mind 

Distempered by the unapproachable 

Erinnys. Yet did he escape from death, 3°° 

And drove the lowing herds to Phylace 

And Pylos, and avenged his cruel wrong 

On Neleus, carrying off his child to be 

A consort for his brother. Then he came 

Into the realm of Argos, famed for steeds; 3°5 

For there it was decreed that he should dwell, 



66 The Odyssey. 

And rule o'er many of the Argive race. 

And there he took a wife and built a house, — 

A lofty pile ; and there to him were born 

Antiphates and Mantius, valiant men. 3'° 

Antiphates was father of a son, 

The brave Oicleus, and to him was born 

Amphioraiis, one of those whose voice 

Rouses the nations. iEgis-bearing Jove 

And Phoebus loved him with exceeding love; 315 

Yet reached he not the threshold of old age, 

But, through the treachery of his bribed wife, 

Perished too soon at Thebes. To him were born 

Two sons, Alcmason and Amphilochus. 

Clytus and Polyphides were the sons 3*° 

Of Mantius ; but Aurora, she who fills 

A golden chariot, bore away to heaven 

Clytus for his great beauty, there to dwell 

Among the immortals, while Apollo gave 

To Polyphides of the noble mind 3*5 

To be a prophet, first of living men, 

Since now Amphiaraus was no more. 

His father had displeased him, and he went 

To Hyperesia, where he dwelt, and there 

Revealed to all what yet should come to pass. 330 



Book xv. 67 

It was his son who now approached ; his name 
Was Theoclymenus ; he saw the prince 
Telemachus, who stood beside the swift 
Black ship, and, pouring a libation, prayed ; 
And thus he said to him in winged words : — 335 

" My friend, whom here beside this bark I find 
Making a pious offering, I entreat 
Both by that offering and the deity, 
And by thy life, and by the lives of these 
Who follow thee, declare to me the truth, 340 

And keep back nought of all that I inquire, — 
Who art thou, from what race of men, and where 
Thy city lies, and who thy parents are." 

Then spake in turn discreet Telemachus ; 
Stranger, to every point I answer thee. 34s 

I am by race a son of Ithaca, 
My father was Ulysses when alive, 
But he has died a miserable death ; 
Long years has he been absent, and I came 
With my companions here, and this black ship, 35° 

To gather tidings of my father's fate." 

Then said the godlike Theoclymenus : 
" I too, like thee, am far away from home ; 
For I have slain a man of my own tribe, 



68 The Odyssey. 

And he had many brothers, many friends, 35s 

In Argos famed for steeds. Great is the power 

Of those Achaians, and I flee from them 

And the black doom of death, to be henceforth 

A wanderer among men. O, shelter me 

On board thy galley! I, a fugitive, 36° 

Implore thy mercy, lest they overtake 

And slay me ; they are surely on my track." 

And thus discreet Telemachus replied : 
" If thou desire to come on board my ship, 
I shall not hinder thee. Come with us then, 36s 

And take a friendly share in what we have." 

So saying he received his brazen spear, 
And laid it on the good ship's deck, and went 
Himself on board, and, taking at the stern 
His place, he seated Theoclymenus 37° 

Beside him. Then the mariners cast loose 
The hawsers, and Telemachus gave forth 
The order to prepare for sea. They heard 
And eagerly obeyed ; they raised the mast, 
A pine-tree stem, — and, bringing it to stand 37s 

In its deep socket, bound it there with cords, 
And hoisted by their strongly twisted thongs 
The ship's white sails. The blue-eyed Pallas sent 



Book xv. 69 

A favorable and fresh-blowing wind, 

That swept the sky to drive more speedily 380 

The galley through the salt-sea waves. They came 

To Cruni, and to Chalcis pleasantly 

Watered by rivers. Now the sun went down ; 

Night closed around their way, but onward still 

A favorable wind from Jupiter 385 

Toward Pherae bore them, and the hallowed coast 

Of Elis, where the Epeian race bear sway, 

And then among the isles whose rocky peaks 

Rise from the waters. Here Telemachus 

Mused thoughtfully on what his fate might be, — 39° 

To perish by the ambush or escape. 

Meantime Ulysses and the swineherd sat 
At meat within the lodge ; the other men 
Were at the board, and when the calls of thirst 
And hunger ceased, Ulysses spake to try 395 

The swineherd, whether he were bent to show 
Yet further kindness, ( and entreat his stay, 
Or whether he would send him to the town. 

" Eumaeus, hearken thou, and all the rest. 
To-morrow 't is my wish to go to town, 400 

That I may beg, and be no charge to thee 
And thy companions. Give me thy advice, 



jo The Odyssey. 

And send a trusty guide to show the way. 

There will I roam the streets, for so I must, 

And haply some one there will give a cup 4°5 

Of wine and cake of meal. And when I find 

The house of great Ulysses, I will tell 

The sage Penelope the news I bring. 

Nay, I would even go among the crew 

Of arrogant suitors, who perhaps might give 41° 

A meal, for there is plenty at their feasts, 

And I would do whatever they require. 

For let me tell thee, and do thou give heed, 

There lives no man who can contend with me 

In menial tasks, — to keep alive a fire 415 

With fuel, cleave dry wood, and carve and roast 

The meat and pour the wine, — whate'er is done 

By poor men waiting on the better sort." 

And thou, Eumsus, keeper of the swine, 
Didst answer in displeasure : " Woe is me ! 4*0 

How could thy bosom harbor such a thought? 
O stranger ! thou must surely be resolved 
To perish if thy purpose be to go 
Among the suitor crew, whose insolence 
And riot reach the iron vault of heaven. 4»5 

Not such attendants minister to them 



Book XV. yi 

As thou art, but fair youths arrayed in cloaks 

And tunics, with sleek heads and smooth of face. 

These wait at polished tables heavily 

Loaded with bread and flesh and wine. Stay thou 430 

Content among us, sure that no one here 

Is wearied by thy presence, neither I 

Nor any of my fellows. When he comes, 

The dear son of Ulysses will provide 

For thee the garments thou dost need, — a cloak 435 

And tunic, — and will send thee where thou wilt." 

Ulysses, the great sufferer, answered thus : 
" I pray that thou mayst be as dear to Jove, 
The great All-Father, as thou art to me, 
Since through thy kindness I enjoy a pause 440 

Amid my weary wanderings. There is nought 
Worse than a wandering life. Unseemly cares 
A hungry stomach brings to homeless men ; 
Hardship and grief are theirs. But since thou wilt 
That I remain and wait for thy young lord, 44s 

Speak to me of the mother of thy chief 
Ulysses, and his father, whom he left 
Just on the threshold of old age, if yet 
They live, and still may look upon the sun ; 
Or have they died, and passed to Pluto's realm ? " 45° 



72 The Odyssey. 

And then in turn the master swineherd spake : 
" Rightly and truly will I answer thee, 

stranger ! still Laertes lives, but prays 
Continually to Jove that he may die 

In his own house ; for sorely he laments 455 

His son long absent, and his excellent wife, 

Bride of his youth, whose death has brought on him 

Sharp sorrow, and old age before its time. 

By a sad death she died, — through wasting grief 

For her lost, glorious son. May no one here, 460 

No friend of mine, nor one who has bestowed 

A kindness on me, die by such a death ! 

While yet she lived, great as her sorrow was, 

1 loved to speak with her and hear her words ; 

For she had reared me with her youngest-born,— 46s 

Her daughter, long-robed Ctimena. With her 

Was I brought up, and scarcely less than her 

Was held in honor. When at length we came 

Into the pleasant years of youth, they sent 

The princess hence to Samos, and received 47° 

Large presents ; but to me her mother gave 

Garments of price, a tunic and a cloak, 

And sandals for my feet, and sent me forth 

Into the fields, and loved me more and more. 



Book xv. 



73 



All this is over now, yet must I say 475 

My calling has been prospered by the gods. 

From this I have the means to eat and drink, 

And wherewithal to feast a worthy guest ; 

But from the queen I never have a word 

Or deed of kindness, since that evil came 480 

Upon her house, — that crew of lawless men. 

Greatly the servants would rejoice to speak 

Before their mistress, and inquire her will, 

And eat and drink, and carry to their homes 

Some gift, for gifts delight a servant's heart." 485 

Again Ulysses, the sagacious, spake : 
" Swineherd Eumasus, thou, while yet a child, 
Wert doubtless strangely tossed about the world, 
Far from thy kindred and thy native land. 
Now tell me, was the spacious town wherein 49° 

Thy father and thy mother dwelt laid waste ? 
Or wert thou left among the flocks and herds 
Untended, and borne off by hostile men, 
Who came in ships and sold thee to the lord 
Of these possessions for a worthy price ? " 495 

And then the master swineherd spake again : 
" Since thou dost ask me, stranger, hear my words 
In silence ; sit at ease and drink thy wine. 



VOL. II. 



74 The Odyssey. 

These nights are very long ; there 's time enough 

For sleep, and time to entertain, ourselves s°° 

With talk. It is not fitting to lie down 

Ere the due hour arrive, and too much sleep 

Is hurtful. Whosoever here shall feel 

The strong desire, let him withdraw and sleep, 

And rise with early morn and break his fast, s°s 

And tend my master's swine. Let us remain 

Within, and drink and feast, and pass the time 

Gayly, relating what we have endured, 

Each one of us ; for in the after time 

One who has suffered much and wandered far s'° 

May take a pleasure even in his griefs. 

" But let me tell what thou hast asked of me : 
Beyond Ortygia lies an island named 
Syria ; thou must have heard of it. The sun 
Above it turns his course. It is not large, s's 

But fruitful, fit for pasturage, and rich 
In flocks, abounding both in wine and wheat. 
There never famine comes, nor foul disease 
Fastens on wretched mortals ; but when men 
Grow old, Apollo of the silver bow s*° 

Comes with Diana, aims his silent shafts, 
And slays them. There two cities stand, and share 



Book xv. 75 

The isle between them. There my father reigned, 

The godlike Ctesias, son of Ormenus, 

And both the cities owned him as their king. 5*5 

" There came a crew of that seafaring race, 
The people of Phoenicia, to our isle. 
Shrewd fellows they, and brought in their black ship 
Large store of- trinkets. In my father's house 
Was a Phoenician woman, large and fair, 53° 

And skilful in embroidery. As she came 
A laundress to their ship, those cunning men 
Seduced her. One of them obtained her love, — 
For oft doth love mislead weak womankind, 
Even of the more discreet. Her paramour 535 

Asked who she was, and whence. She pointed out 
The lofty pile in which my father dwelt. 

" ' At Sidon, rich in brass, I had my birth, — 
A daughter of the opulent Arybas ; 

And once, as I was coming from the fields, 54° 

The Taphian pirates seized and bore me off, 
And brought me to this isle and sold me here, 
At that man's house ; much gold he paid for me.' 

" Then said her paramour : ' Wilt thou not then 
Return with us, that thou mayst see again 545 

Father and mother, and their fair abode ? 



7 6 The Odyssey. 

For yet they live, and rumor says are rich.' 

"To this the woman answered: ' I consent, 
If first ye take an oath, — ye mariners, — • 
And pledge your faith to bear me safely home.' 55° 

" She spake, and they complied, and when the oath 
Was duly taken, thus the woman said : — 

" ' Now hold your peace ; let none of all the crew 
Speak to me more, in meeting on the road 
Or at the fountain, lest some one should tell 555 

The old man at the house, and he suspect 
Some fraud and bind me fast, and plot your death. 
Lock up your words within your breast ; make haste 
To buy supplies, and when the ship is full 
Of all things needful, let a messenger 56° 

Come to me at the palace with all speed ; 
And I will bring with me whatever gold 
My hands may find, and something else to pay 
My passage. I am nurse to the young heir 
Of the good man who dwells in yonder halls, — 565 

A shrewd boy for his years, who oft goes out 
With me, — and I will lead him to the ship, 
And he will bring, in any foreign land 
To which ye carry him, a liberal price.' 

" The woman spake, and to our fair abode 570 



Book xv 77 

Departed. The Phoenician crew remained 

Until the twelvemonth's end, and filled their ship 

With many things, and, when its roomy hull 

Was fully laden, sent a messenger 

To tell the woman. He, a cunning man, 575 

Came to my father's house, and brought with him 

A golden necklace set with amber beads. 

The palace maidens and the gracious queen, 

My mother, took it in their hands, and gazed 

Upon it, and debated of its price. 580 

Meantime the bearer gave the sign, and soon 

Departed to the ship. The woman took 

My hand and led me forth. Within the hall 

She found upon the tables ready placed 

The goblets for my father's guests, his peers ; 585 

But they were absent, and in council yet 

Amid a great assembly. She concealed 

Three goblets in her bosom, and bore off 

The theft. I followed thoughtlessly. The sun 

Went down, and darkness brooded o'er the ways, 59° 

Briskly we walked, and reached the famous port 

And the fast-sailing ship. They took us both 

On board, and sailed. Along its ocean path 

The vessel ran, and Jupiter bestowed 



78 The Odyssey. 

A favorable wind. Six days we sailed, 595 

Both night and day ; but when Saturnian Jove 

Brought the seventh day, Diana, archer-queen, 

Struck down the woman, and with sudden noise 

Headlong she plunged into the hold, as dives 

A sea-gull. But the seamen cast her forth 6oo 

To fishes and to sea-calves. I was left 

Alone and sorrowful. The winds and waves 

Carried our galley on to Ithaca ; 

And there Laertes purchased me, and thus 

I first beheld the land in which I dwell." 6°s 

And then again the great Ulysses spake : 
" Eumaeus, the sad story of thy wrongs 
And sufferings moves me deeply ; yet hath Jove 
Among thy evil fortunes given this good, 
That, after all thy sufferings, thou art lodged «i° 

With a good master, who abundantly 
Provides thee meat and drink ; thou leadest here 
A pleasant life, while I am come to thee* 
From wandering long and over many lands." 

So talked they with each other. No long time 6'5 

They passed in sleep, for soon the Morning came, 
Throned on her car of gold. Beside the shore 
The comrades of Telemachus cast loose 
The sails, took down the mast, and with their oars 



Book xv. 79 

Brought in the vessel to its place. They threw fc° 

The anchors out and bound the hawsers fast, 
And went upon the sea-beach, where they dressed 
Their morning meal, and mingled purple wine. 
Then, when the calls of thirst and hunger ceased, 
Discreet Telemachus bespake the crew : — 6»s 

" Take the black ship to town. I visit first 
The fields, and see my herdsmen, and at eve 
Will come to town. To-morrow I will give 
The parting feast, rich meats and generous wine." 

Then said the godlike Theoclymenus : 630 

" Whither, my son, am I to go ? What house 
Of all the chiefs of rugged Ithaca 
Shall I seek shelter in ? with thee, perhaps, 
In thine own palace where thy mother dwells." 

And thus discreet Telemachus replied : 635 

" I would have asked thee at another time 
To make our house thy home, for there would be 
No lack of kindly welcome. T were not well 
To ask thee now, for I shall not be there, 
Nor will my mother see thee, — since not oft 640 

Doth she appear before the suitor-train, 
But in an upper room, apart from them, 
Weaves at her loom a web. Another man 
I name, Eurymachus, the illustrious son 



80 The Odyssey. 

Of the sage Polybus, to be thy host. 645 

The noblest of the suitors he, and seeks 

Most earnestly to wed the queen, and take 

The rank Ulysses held. Olympian Jove, 

Who dwells in ether, knows the fatal day 

That may o'ertake the suitors ere she wed." 650 

As thus he spake, a falcon on the right 
Flew by, Apollo's messenger. A dove 
Was in his talons, which he tore, and poured 
The feathers down between Telemachus 
And where the galley lay. When this was seen 6 55 

By Theoclymenus, he called the youth 
Apart, alone, and took his hand and said : — 

" The bird that passed us, O Telemachus, 
Upon the right, flew not without a god 
To guide him. When I saw it, well I knew 660 

The omen. Not in Ithaca exists 
A house of a more kingly destiny 
Than thine, and ever will its power prevail." 

And thus discreet Telemachus replied : 
" O stranger, may thy saying come to pass : 665 

Then shalt thou quickly know me for thy friend, 
And be rewarded with such liberal gifts 
That all who meet thee shall rejoice with thee." 

Then turning to Piraeus he bespake 



Book xv. 8 1 

That faithful follower thus : " Piraeus, son 670 

Of Clytius, thou who ever wert the first 

To move, at my command, of all the men 

Who went with me to Pylos, take, I pray, 

This stranger to thy house, and there provide 

For him, and honor him until I come." 67s 

Piraeus, mighty with the spear, replied : 
" Telemachus, however long thy stay, 
This man shall be my guest, nor ever lack 
Beneath my roof for hospitable care." 

He spake, and climbed the deck, and bade his men 680 
Enter the ship and cast the fastenings loose. 
Quickly they came together, went on board 
And manned the benches, while Telemachus 
Bound the fair sandals to his feet, and took 
His massive spear with its sharp blade of brass 685 

That lay upon the deck. The men unbound 
The hawsers, shoved the galley forth, and sailed 
Townward, as they were bidden by the son 
Of great Ulysses. Meantime the quick feet 
Of the young chieftain bore him on until 69° 

He reached the lodge where his great herds of swine 
Were fed, and, careful of his master's wealth, 
Beside his charge the worthy swineherd slept. 

VOL. II. I I 



BOOK XVI. 

1\ /TEANTIME Ulysses and that noble hind 

The swineherd, in the lodge, at early dawn, 
Lighted a fire, prepared a meal, and sent 
The herdsmen forth to drive the swine afield. 
The dogs, so apt to bark, came fawning round 5 

And barked not as Telemachus drew near. 
Ulysses heard the sound of coming feet, 
And marked the crouching dogs, and suddenly 
Bespake Eumaeus thus with winged words : — 

" Eumsus, without doubt some friend of thine, «° 

Or some one known familiarly, is near. 
There is no barking of the dogs ; they fawn 
Around him, and I hear the sound of feet." 

Scarce had he spoken, when within the porch 
Stood his dear son. The swineherd starting up, is 

Surprised, let fall the vessels from his hands 
In which he mingled the rich wines, and flew 
To meet his master ; kissed him on the brow ; 



Book xvi. 8$ 

Kissed both his shining eyes and both his hands, 

With many tears. As when a father takes 20 

Into his arms a son whom tenderly 

He loves, returning from a distant land 

In the tenth year, — his only son, the child 

Of his old age, for whom he long has borne 

Hardship and grief, — so to Telemachus 25 

The swineherd clung, and kissed him o'er and o'er, 

As one escaped from death, and, shedding still 

Warm tears, bespake him thus with winged words : — 

" Thou comest, O Telemachus ! the light 
Is not more sweet to me. I never thought 30 

To see thee more when thou hadst once embarked 
For Pylos. Now come in, beloved child, 
And let my heart rejoice that once again 
I have thee here, so newly come from far. 
For 't is not often that thou visitest 35 

Herdsmen and fields, but dwellest in the town, —r 
Such is thy will, — beholding day by day 
The wasteful pillage of the suitor-train." 

And thus discreet Telemachus replied : 
" So be it, father ; for thy sake I came 4° 

•To see thee with these eyes, and hear thee speak 
And tell me if my mother dwells within 



84 The Odyssey. 

The palace yet ; or has some wooer led 

The queen away, his bride, and does the couch 

Of great Ulysses lie untapestried, 45 

With ugly cobwebs gathering over it ? " 

And then the master swineherd spake in turn : 
" Most true it is that with a constant mind 
The queen inhabits yet thy palace halls, 
And wastes in tears her wretched nights and days." 5° 

So speaking he received his brazen lance, 
And over the stone threshold passed the prince 
Into the lodge. Ulysses yielded up 
His seat to him ; Telemachus forbade. 

" Nay, stranger, sit ; it shall be ours to find 55 

Elsewhere a seat in this our lodge, and he 
Who should provide it is already here." 

He spake ; Ulysses turned, and took again 
His place ; the swineherd made a pile of twigs 
And covered it with skins, on which sat down 6° 

The dear son of Ulysses. Next he brought 
Dishes of roasted meats which yet remained, 
Part of the banquet of the day before, 
And heaped the canisters with bread, and mixed 
The rich wines in a wooden bowl. He sat 65 

Right opposite Ulysses. All put forth 



Book xvi. Ss 

Their hands and shared the meats upon the board ; 
And when the calls of thirst and hunger ceased, 
Thus to the swineherd said Telemachus : — 

" Whence, father, is this stranger, and how brought 7° 
By seamen to the coast of Ithaca ? 
And who are they that brought him? — ror I deem 
He came not over to our isle on foot." 

And thus, Eumaeus, thou didst make reply : 
" True answer will I make to all. He claims 75 

To be a son of the broad isle of Crete, 
And says that in his wanderings he has passed 
Through many cities of the world, for so 
Some god ordained ; and now, escaped by flight 
From a Thesprotian galley, he has sought »° 

A refuge in my lodge. Into thy hands 
I give him ; deal thou with him as thou wilt. 
He is thy suppliant, and makes suit to thee." 

Then spake discreet Telemachus again : 
" Eumaeus, thou hast uttered words that pierce 85 

My heart with pain ; for how can I receive 
A stranger at my house ? I am a youth 
Who never yet has trusted in his arm 
To beat the offerer of an insult back. 
And in my mother's mind the choice is yet 9° 



86 The Odyssey. 

Uncertain whether to remain with me 

The mistress of my household, keeping still 

Her constant reverence for her husband's bed, 

And still obedient to the people's voice, 

Or whether she shall follow as a bride 95 

Him of the Achaian suitors in my halls 

Who is accounted worthiest, and who brings 

The richest gifts. Now, as to this thy guest, 

Since he has sought thy lodge, I give to him 

A cloak and tunic, seemly of their kind, 100 

A two-edged sword, and sandals for his feet. 

And I will send him to whatever coast 

He may desire to go. Yet, if thou wilt, 

Lodge him beneath thy roof, and I will send 

Raiment and food, that he may be no charge 105 

To thee or thy companions. To my house 

Among the suitor-train I cannot bear 

That he should go. Those men are insolent 

Beyond all measure ; they would scoff at him, 

And greatly should I grieve. The boldest man no 

Against so many might contend in vain, 

And greater is their power by far than mine." 

Then spake Ulysses, the great sufferer : 
"O friend, — since I have liberty to speak, — 



Book xvi. 8 j 

My very heart is wounded when I hear 115 

What wrongs the suitors practise in thy halls 

Against a youth like thee. But give me leave 

To ask if thou submittest willingly, 

Or do thy people, hearkening to some god, 

Hate thee with open hatred ? Dost thou blame no 

Thy brothers ? — for in brothers men confide 

Even in a desperate conflict. Would that I 

Were young again, and with the will I have, 

Or that I could become Ulysses' son, 

Or were that chief himself returned at last "5 

From all his wanderings, — and there yet is hope 

Of his return, — then might another strike 

My head off if I would not instantly 

Enter the house of Laertiades 

And make myself a mischief to them all. 13° 

But should they overcome me, thus alone 

Contending with such numbers, I would choose 

Rather in mine own palace to be slain 

Than every day behold such shameful deeds, — 

Insulted guests, maid-servants foully dragged 13s 

Through those fair palace chambers, wine-casks drained, 

And gluttons feasting idly, wastefully, 

And others toiling for them without end." 



88 The Odyssey. 

Then spake again discreet Telemachus : 
" Stranger, thou shalt be answered faithfully. h° 

Know, then, the people are by no means wroth 
With me, nor have I brothers to accuse, 
Though in a desperate conflict men rely 
Upon a brother's aid. Saturnian Jove 
Confines our lineage to a single head. 145 

The king Arcesius had an only son, 
Laertes, and to him was only born 
Ulysses ; and Ulysses left me here, 
The only scion of his house, and he 

Had little joy of me. Our halls are filled 15° 

With enemies, the chief men of the isles, — 
Dulichium, Samos, and Zacynthus dark 
With forests, and the rugged Ithaca, — 
So many woo my mother and consume 
Our substance. She rejects not utterly 155 

Their hateful suit, nor yet will give consent 
And end it. They go on to waste my wealth, 
And soon will end me also ; but the event 
Rests with the gods. — And go thou now with speed, 
Eumasus, father, to Penelope, 160 

And say that I am safe, and just returned 
From Pylos. I remain within the lodge. 



Book xvi. 89 

And then come back as soon as thou hast told 

The queen alone. Let none of all the Greeks 

Hear aught ; for they are plotting harm to me." 165 

Then thus, Eumaeus, thou didst make reply : 
" Enough, I see it all, thy words are said 
To one who understands them. But, I pray, 
Direct me whether in my way to take 
A message to Laertes, the distressed. 170 

While sorrowing for Ulysses he o'ersaw 
The labors of the field, and ate and drank, 
As he had appetite, with those who wrought. 
But since thy voyage to the Pylian coast 
They say he never takes his daily meals 175 

As he was wont, nor oversees the work, 
But sits and mourns and sighs and pines away, 
Until his limbs are shrivelled to the bone." 

Then spake discreet Telemachus again : 
" 'T is sad, but we must leave him to his grief 180 

A little while. Could everything be made 
To happen as we mortals wish, I then 
Would first desire my father's safe return. 
But thou, when thou hast given thy message, haste 
Hither again, nor wander through the fields 185 

To him ; but let my mother send at once 



90 The Odyssey. 

The matron of her household, privately, 
To bear the tidings to the aged man." 

He spake to speed the swineherd, who took up 
His sandals, bound them on, and bent his way 19° 

Townward. Not unperceived by Pallas went 
Eumaeus from the lodge. She came in shape 
A woman beautiful and stately, skilled 
In household arts, the noblest. Near the gate 
She stood, right opposite. Ulysses saw ; 195 

Telemachus beheld her not ; the gods 
Not always manifest themselves to all. 
Ulysses and the mastiffs saw ; the dogs 
Barked not, but, whimpering, fled from her and sought 
The stalls within. She beckoned with her brows ; 200 
Ulysses knew her meaning and came forth, 
And passed the great wall of the court, and there 
Stood near to Pallas, who bespake him thus : — 

" Son of Laertes, nobly born and wise, 
Speak with thy son ; conceal from him the truth *°5 

No longer, that, prepared to make an end 
Of that vile suitor-crew, ye may go up 
Into the royal town. Nor long will I 
Be absent ; I am ready for the assault." 

Thus spake the goddess. Putting forth a wand "° 



Book xvi. 91 

Of gold, she touched the chief. Beneath that touch 

His breast was covered with a new-blanched robe 

And tunic. To his frame it gave new strength; 

His swarthy color came again, his cheeks 

Grew full, and the beard darkened on his chin. 215 

This done, she disappeared. Ulysses came 

Into the lodge again ; his son beheld 

Amazed and overawed, and turned his eves 

Away, as if in presence of a god, 

And thus bespake the chief with winged words : — **o 

" O stranger, thou art other than thou wert ; 
Thy garb is not the same, nor are thy looks ; 
Thou surely art some deity of those 
Whose habitation is the ample heaven. 
Be gracious to us, let us bring to thee «s 

Such sacrifices as thou wilt accept 
And gifts of graven gold ; be merciful." 

Ulysses, the great sufferer, thus replied : 
" I am no god; how am I like the gods? 
I am thy father, he for whom thy sighs 230 

Are breathed, and sorrows borne, and wrongs endured." 

He spake and kissed his son, and from his lids 
Tears fell to earth, that long had been restrained. 
And then Telemachus, who could not think 



92 The Odyssey. 

The stranger was his father, answered thus : — 2 35 

" Nay, thou art not my father, thou art not 
Ulysses ; rather hath some deity 
Sought to deceive me, that my grief may be 
The sharper ; for no mortal man would do 
What has been done, unless some god should come 24° 
To aid him, and to make him young or old 
At pleasure; for thou wert a moment since 
An aged man, and sordidly arrayed, 
And now art like the gods of the wide heaven." 

Ulysses, the sagacious, answered thus : hs 

" It is not well, Telemachus, to greet 
With boundless wonder and astonishment 
Thy father in this lodge. Be sure of this, 
That no Ulysses other than myself 

Will ever enter here. I, who am he, »s° 

Have suffered greatly and have wandered far, 
And in the twentieth year am come again 
To mine own land. Thou hast beheld to-day 
A wonder wrought by Pallas, huntress-queen, 
Who makes me what she will, such power is hers, — »S5 
Sometimes to seem a beggar, and in turn 
A young man in a comely garb. The gods 
Whose home is in the heavens can easily 



Book xvi. 93 

Exalt a mortal man, or bring him low." 

He spake and sat him down. Telemachus ^o 

Around his glorious father threw his arms, 
And shed a shower of tears. Both felt at heart 
A passionate desire to weep ; they wept 
Aloud, — and louder were their cries than those 
Of eagles, or the sharp-clawed vulture tribe, *6 5 

Whose young the hinds have stolen, yet unfledged. 
Still flowed their tears abundantly ; the sun 
Would have gone down and left them weeping still, 
Had not Telemachus at length inquired : — 

" Dear father, tell me in what galley came 27° 

The mariners who brought thee. Of what race 

r 

Claim they to be ? For certainly, I think, 
Thou cam'st not hither travelling on foot." 
Ulysses, the great sufferer, thus replied : 
" My son, thou shalt be answered faithfully. 27s 

Men of a race renowned for seamanship, 
Phasacians, brought me hither. They convey 
Abroad the strangers coming to their isle, 
And, bearing me in one of their swift barks 
Across the sea, they landed me asleep *8o 

In Ithaca. Rich were the gifts they gave, — 
Much brass and gold, and garments from the loom ; 



94 The Odyssey. 

These, so the gods have counselled, lie concealed 
Among the hollow rocks, and I am come, 
Obeying Pallas, to consult with thee 285 

How to destroy our enemies. Give now 
The number of the suitors ; let me know 
How many there may be, and who they are, 
That with a careful judgment I may weigh 
The question whether we shall fall on them, — 290 

We two alone, — or must we seek allies." 
Then spake discreet Telemachus again : 
" O father, I have heard of thy great fame 
My whole life long, — how mighty is thy arm, 
How wise thy counsels. Thou hast said great things, 29s 
And I am thunderstruck. It cannot be 
That two alone should stand before a crowd 
Of valiant men. They are not merely ten, — 
These suitors, — nor twice ten, but many more ; 
Hear, then, their number. From Dulichium come 3°° 
Fifty-and-two, the flower of all its youth, 
With whom are six attendants. Samos sends 
Twice twelve, and twenty more Achaian chiefs 
Come from Zacynthus. Twelve from Ithaca ; 
The noblest of the isle are these, — with whom 305 

Medon the herald comes, — a bard whose song 



Book xvi. 



95 



Is heavenly, — and two servants skilled to spread 

The banquet. Should we in the palace halls 

Assault all these, I fear lest the revenge 

For all thy wrongs would end most bitterly 310 

And grievously for thee. Now, if thy thought 

Be turned to some ally, bethink thee who 

Will combat for us with a willing heart." 

Again Ulysses, the great sufferer, spake : 
"Then will I tell thee; listen, and give heed. vs 

Think whether Pallas and her father, Jove, 
Suffice not for us. Need we more allies ? " 

Arid then discreet Telemachus rejoined : 
" Assuredly the twain whom thou hast named 
Are mighty as allies ; for though they sit 3*° 

On high among the clouds, they yet bear rule 
Both o'er mankind and o'er the living gods." 

Once more Ulysses, the great sufferer, spake : 
" Not long will they avoid the fierce affray 
When in my halls the strength of war is tried 325 

Between me and the suitor crew. Now go 
With early morning to thy home, and there 
Mingle among the suitors. As for me, 
The swineherd afterward shall lead me hence 
To town, a wretched beggar seemingly, 33° 



96 The Odyssey. 

And very old. If there they scoff at me 

In mine own palace, let thy faithful heart 

Endure it, though I suffer ; though they seize 

My feet, and by them drag me to the door r 

Or strike at me with weapon-blades, look on 335 

And bear it ; yet reprove with gentle words 

Their folly. They will never heed reproof; 

The day of their destruction is at hand. 

And this I tell thee further, and be sure 

To keep my words in memory. As soon 34° 

As Pallas, goddess of wise counsel, gives 

The warning, I shall nod to thee, and thou, 

When thou perceivest it, remove at once 

All weapons from my halls to a recess 

High in an upper chamber. With soft words 345 

Quiet the suitors when they ask thee why. 

Say, ' I would take them where there comes no smoke, 

Since now they seem no longer like to those 

Left by Ulysses when he sailed for Troy, 

But soiled and tarnished by the breath of fire. 35° 

This graver reason, also, Saturn's son 

Hath forced upon my mind, — that ye by chance, 

When full of wine and quarrelling, may wound 

Each other, and disgrace the feast, and bring 



Book xvi. 97 

Shame on your wooing ; for the sight of steel 355 

Draws men to bloodshed.' Say but this, and leave 

Two swords for us, two spears, two oxhide shields, 

Against the day of combat. Pallas then, 

And Jove the All-disposer, will unman 

Their hearts. Moreover, let me say to thee, — 36° 

And keep- my words in memory, — if thou be 

My son, and of my blood, let no man hear 

That now Ulysses is within the isle ; 

Let not Laertes hear of it, nor him 

Who keeps the swine, nor any of the train 3 6 5 

Of servants, nor Penelope herself, 

While thou and I alone search out and prove 

The women of the household, and no less 

The serving-men, to know who honors us, 

And bears us reverence in his heart, and who 37° 

Contemns us, and dishonors even thee." 

Then answered his illustrious son and said : 
" Father, thou yet wilt know my heart, and find 
That of a careless and too easy mood 
I am not ; but a search like this, I think, 375 

Would profit neither of us, and I pray 
That thou wilt well consider it. Long time 
Wouldst thou go wandering from place to place, 

VOL. II. 13 



98 The Odyssey. 

O'er thy estates, to prove the loyalty 

Of every one, while in thy halls at ease 38° 

The suitors wastefully consume thy wealth. 

Yet would I counsel that the women's faith 

Be proved, that the disloyal may be marked 

And the innocent go free. As for the men, 

I would not now inquire from farm to farm ; 38s 

That may be done hereafter, if indeed 

Thou hast a sign from asgis-bearing Jove." 

So talked they with each other. The good ship 
Which brought Telemachus and all his friends 
From Pylos kept meantime upon its way 390 

To Ithaca. There, entering the deep port, 
The seamen hauled the black ship up the beach; 
And then the ready servants took away 
The arms, and to the house of Clytius bore 
The costly gifts. A herald from the ship 39s 

Went forward to the palace of the king 
With tidings to the sage Penelope 
That now her son was come and in the fields, 
And that the ship at his command had reached 
The city, lest the royal dame might feel 4°° 

Fear for his safety, and give way to tears. 
The herald and the noble swineherd met, 



Book xvi. 99 

Each bearing the same message to the queen. 

Entering the palace of the godlike king, 

And standing midst the maids, the herald said : — 4°s 

" O lady, thy beloved son is come." 
But close beside the queen the swineherd stood, 
And told her everything which her dear son 
Had bid him say ; and, having thus fulfilled 
His errand, left the palace and its court. 4»° 

Then were the suitors vexed and sorrowful, 
And going from the palace, and without 
The great wall that enclosed the court, sat down 
Before the gates, and there Eurymachus, 
The son of Polybus, harangued the throng : — 415 

" Behold, my friends, Telemachus has done 
A marvellous thing ; this voyage, which we thought 
He could not make, is made. Now let us launch 
A ship, the best that we can find, and man 
With fishermen the benches, sending it 4»° 

To find our friends, and hasten their return." 

Scarce had he spoken when Amphinomus, 
In turning where he stood, beheld a bark 
Enter the port's deep waters, with a crew 
That furled the sails and held the oars in hand. 425 

He laughed, well pleased, and to the suitors said : — 



ioo The Odyssey. 

"There needs no message to be sent, for they 
Are here already. Haply hath some god 
Given them the knowledge, or perchance they saw, 
But could not overtake, the prince's ship." 430 

He spake ; they rose and hastened to the strand, 
And quickly drew the galley up the beach. 
The ready servants bore the arms away ; 
Then met they all in council, suffering none 
Save of the suitor-train to meet with them, — 435 

None, either young or old. Eupeithes' son, 
Antinoiis, standing forth, bespake them thus : — 

" How strangely do the gods protect this man 
From evil ! All day long spy after spy 
Has sat and watched upon the airy heights, 44° 

And when the sun was set we never slept 
On land, but ever in our gallant ship 
Sailed, waiting for the holy morn, and lay 
In constant ambush for Telemachus, 

To seize and to destroy him. Yet behold, 445 

Some deity has brought him home. And now 
Frame we a plan to cut off utterly 
Telemachus, and leave him no escape; 
For certainly I think that while he lives 
The end we aim at cannot be attained. 450 



Book xvi. ioi 

Shrewd is the youth in counsel and device, 

And we no longer have, as once we had, 

The people's favor. Let us quickly act, 

Ere he can call a council of the Greeks. 

That he will do without delay, and there 455 

Will rise in wrath to tell them how we planned 

His death by violence, and failed ; and they 

Who hear assuredly will not approve 

The plotted mischief. They may drive us forth 

With outrage from our country to a land 46° 

Of strangers. Let us be the first to strike, 

And slay him in the fields or on the way, 

And, taking his possessions to ourselves, 

Share equally his wealth. Then may we give 

This palace to his mother, and the man 465 

Whom she shall wed, whoever he may be. 

Or if this plan mislike you, and ye choose 

That he should live, and keep the fair estate 

That was his father's, let us not go on 

Thronging the palace to consume his wealth 470 

In revelry, but each with liberal gifts 

Woo her from his own dwelling ; and let him 

Who gives most generously, and whom fate 

Most favors, take the lady as his bride." 



102 The Odyssey. 

He spake, and all were mute. Amphinomus, .',75 

The illustrious son of royal Nisus, rose. 
The grandson of Aretias, it was he 
Who led the suitors from Dulichium's fields, 
Grassy and rich in corn. Penelope 

Liked best his words, for generous was his thought, 48a 
And with a generous purpose thus he spake : — 

" Nay, friends, not mine is the advice to slay 
Telemachus. It is a fearful thing 
To take a royal life. Then let us first 
Inquire the pleasure of the gods. For if 485 

The oracles of mighty Jupiter 
Approve it, I would do the deed myself, 
Or bid another do it ; but if they 
Consent not, 't is my counsel to forbear." 

He spake, and all approved. At once they rose, 49° 
And, entering the palace, sat them down 
On shining thrones. Meantime Penelope 
Had formed the purpose to appear before 
The arrogant suitors, for the news was brought 
Into her chamber of the plot to slay 495 

Her son ; the herald Medon overheard, 
And told her all. So to the hall she went 
With her attendant maids. The glorious dame 



Book xvi. 103 

Drew near the suitor-train, and took her stand 

Beside a column of the stately pile, 5°° 

And with a delicate veil before her cheeks 

Began to speak, and chid Antinoiis thus : — 

" Antinoiis, mischief- plotter, insolent ! 
The rumor is that thou excellest all 

Of thy own age among the Ithacans s°5 

In understanding and in speech. Yet such 
Thou never wert. Ferocious as thou art, 
Why seek the death of my Telemachus, 
And treat with scorn the suppliants of whose prayer 
Jove is the witness ? An unholy thing 51° 

It is when men against their fellow-men 
Plot mischief. Dost thou then forget that once 
Thy father came to us a fugitive, 
In terror of the people, who were wroth 
Because he joined the Taphian pirate-race, 515 

And plundered the Thesprotians, our allies. 
The people would have slain him, and have torn 
His heart out, and have pillaged his large wealth ; 
Ulysses checked their rage, and held them back, 
Fierce as they were. Now thou dost waste his goods 5*° 
Most shamefully, and woo his wife, and slay 
His son, and multiply my woes. Cease now, 



104 The Odyssey. 

I charge thee, and persuade the rest to cease." 

Eurymachus, the son of Polybus, 
Replied : " O daughter of Icarius, sage 525 

Penelope, take heart ; let no such thought 
Possess thy mind. There is no man on earth, 
Nor will there be, who shall lay violent hands 
Upon Telemachus, thy son, while I 

Am living, and yet keep the gift of sight. 530 

I say, and will perform it, — his black blood 
Shall flow and bathe my spear. Ulysses oft, 
Spoiler of realms, would take me on his knee, 
And put the roasted meats into my hands, 
And give me ruddy wine. I therefore hold 53s 

Telemachus of all mankind most dear, 
And I will bid him have no fear of death 
From any of the suitors. If it come, 
Sent by the gods, he cannot then escape." 

So spake he to appease her, while he planned 540 

The murder of her son. The queen went up 
To the fair upper chambers, and there wept 
Ulysses, her dear spouse, till o'er her lids 
The blue-eyed Pallas poured the balm of sleep. 

At evening to Ulysses and his son 54s 

The noble swineherd went, while busily 



Book xvi. 105 

They made the supper ready, having slain 

A porker one year old. Then instantly 

Stood Pallas by Ulysses, and put forth 

Her wand and touched him, making him again 55° 

Old, and clad sordidly in beggar's weeds, 

Lest that the swineherd, knowing at a look 

His master, might not keep the knowledge locked 

In his own breast, but, hastening forth betray 

The secret to the chaste Penelope. 555 

Then to the swineherd said Telemachus : 
" Noble Eumaeus, welcome ; what reports 
Are in the town ? Have those large-minded men, 
The suitors, left their ambush and returned, 
Or are they waiting yet for me to pass? " 56° 

. And thus, Eumaeus, thou didst make reply : 
" Of that, indeed, I never thought to ask, 
In going through the town. My only care 
Was to return, as soon as I had given 
My message, with such speed as I could make. 565 

I met a messenger, a herald sent 
By thy companions, who was first to tell 
Thy mother of thy safe return. Yet this 
I know, for I beheld it with my eyes. 
When outside of the city, where the hill 57° 

VOL. II. 14 



106 The Odyssey. 

Of Hermes stands, I saw a gallant bark 
Entering the port, and carrying many men. 
Heavy it was with shields and two-edged spears ; 
'T was they, I thought, and yet I cannot tell." 

He spake ; Telemachus the valiant looked 575 

Upon his father with a smile unmarked 
By good Eumasus. When their task was done, 
And the board spread, they feasted. No one lacked 
His portion of the common meal. Their thirst 
And hunger satisfied, they laid them down 58° 

To rest, and so received the gift of sleep. 



BOOK XVII. 

\T OW when the rosy-fingered Morn looked forth, — 

The daughter of the Dawn, — Telemachus, 
The dear son of the great Ulysses, bound 
The shapely sandals underneath his feet, 
And took the massive spear that fitted well 5 

His grasp, and, as he stood in act to go 
Up to the town, bespake the swineherd thus : — 

" Father, I hasten to the town, that there 
My mother may behold me ; for I think 
She will not cease to grieve, and fear, and weep, 10 

Till her eyes rest on me. I leave with thee 
The charge of leading our unfortunate guest 
Into the city, there to beg his bread. 
Whoever will may give him food and drink. 
All men I cannot feed, and I have cares 15 

Enough already. If he chafe at this, 
The worse for him. I like to speak my mind." 
And thus Ulysses, the sagacious, spake : 



108 The Odyssey. 

" Nor do I wish, my friend, to loiter here. 

Better it is for one like me to beg *o 

In town than in the country. In the town, 

Whoever chooses will bestow his dole ; 

But here, if I remain about the stalls, 

I am no longer of an age to do 

All that a master may require. Go thou ; *s 

This man, at thy command, will lead me hence, 

As soon as I have warmed me at the fire, 

And the air grows milder. This keen morning-cold 

May end me, and the way, ye say, is long." 

He ended ; from the lodge Telemachus 3° 

Passed quickly, meditating to destroy 
The suitors. Coming to his stately home, 
He leaned his spear against a column's shaft, 
And, crossing the stone threshold, entered in. 
First Eurycleia, who had been his nurse, 35 

Beheld him, as she spread the beautiful thrones 
With skins, and ran to him with weeping eyes ; 
And round him other handmaids of the house 
Of resolute Ulysses thronged. They gave 
Fond welcome, kissing him upon the brow 4° 

And shoulders. Issuing from her chamber next 
The chaste Penelope, like Dian's self 



Book xvii. 109 

In beauty, or like golden Venus, came, 

And, weeping, threw her arms about her son, 

And kissed him on his forehead and on both 45 

His glorious eyes, and said, amidst her tears : — 

" Light of my eyes ! O my Telemachus ! 
Art thou, then, come ? I never thought again 
To see thee, when I heard thou hadst embarked 
For Pylos, — secretly, and knowing me 5° 

Unwilling, — in the hope to gather there 
Some tidings of thy father. Tell me now 
All that has happened, all that thou hast seen." 

And thus discreet Telemachus replied : 
" Nay, mother, waken not my griefs again, 55 

Nor move my heart to rage. I have just now 
Escaped a cruel death. But go and bathe, 
And put fresh garments on, and when thou com'st 
Into thy chamber with thy maidens, make 
A vow to all the gods that thou wilt burn 60 

A sacrifice of chosen hecatombs 
When Jupiter shall have avenged our wrongs. 
Now must I hasten to the market-place 
In quest of one who came with me a guest 
From Pylos. Him, with all my faithful crew, 65 

I sent before me to this port, and bade 



1 1 o The Odyssey. 

Pirseus lead him to his own abode, 

There to be lodged and honored till I came." 

He spake, nor flew his words unheeded by. 
The princess bathed, and put fresh garments on, 7° 

And vowed to all the gods a sacrifice 
Of chosen hecatombs when Jupiter 
Should punish the wrong-doers. While she prayed, 
Telemachus went forth, his spear in hand. 
Two fleet dogs followed him. Minerva shed 75 

A godlike beauty o'er his form and face, 
And all the people wondered as he came. 
The suitors thronged around him with smooth words, 
Yet plotting mischief in their hearts. He turned 
From their assembly hastily, and took 80 

His place where Mentor sat with Antiphus, 
And Halitherses, — all his father's friends 
And his from the beginning. While they asked 
Of all that he had seen, Pirasus came, 
The famous spearman, bringing through the town 85 

The stranger with him to the market-place. 
Nor long Telemachus delayed, but came 
To meet his guest, and then Piraeus said : — 

" Telemachus, despatch to where I dwell 
Thy serving-women ; I would send to thee, 9° 



Book xvn. 1 1 1 

At once, the gifts which Menelaus gave." 

And then discreet Telemachus replied : 
" We know not yet, Piraeus, what may be 
The event ; and if the suitors privily 
Should slay me in the palace, and divide 95 

The inheritance among them, I prefer 
That thou, instead of them, shouldst have the gifts ; 
But should they meet the fate which I have planned, 
And be cut off, then shalt thou gladly bring 
The treasures, which I gladly will receive." 100 

So spake the prince, and to the palace led 
The unhappy man, his guest. When now they reached 
The stately pile, they both laid down their cloaks 
Upon the benches, and betook themselves 
To the well-polished baths. The attendant maids 105 

There ministered and smoothed their limbs with oil, 
And each received a tunic at their hands, 
And fleecy mantle. Then they left the baths 
And took their seats. A damsel came, and poured 
Water from a fair ewer wrought of gold no 

Into a silver basin for their hands, 
And spread a polished table near their seats ; 
And there the matron of the household placed 
Bread, and the many dishes which her stores 



1 1 2 The Odyssey. 

Supplied. The queen was seated opposite, "5 

Beside a column of the pile, and twirled 

A slender spindle, while the son and guest 

Put forth their hands and shared the meal prepared. 

And when the calls of hunger and of thirst 

Had ceased, thus spake the sage Penelope : — no 

"Telemachus, when I again go up 
Into my chamber, I shall lay me down 
Upon the couch which, since Ulysses sailed 
For Troy with Atreus' sons, has been to me 
A couch of mourning, sprinkled with my tears. us 

And now thou hast not chosen to reveal, 
Ere yet the haughty suitors throng again 
Into these halls, what in thy voyage thou 
Hast haply heard concerning his return." 

And thus discreet Telemachus replied : »3° 

" Then, mother, will I truly tell thee all. 
We went to Pylos, and saw Nestor there, 
The shepherd of the people. Kindly he 
Received me in his stately home, as one 
Might welcome back a wandering son returned 13s 

From foreign lands. Such welcome I received 
Both from the king and his illustrious sons. 
But he had heard, he said, from living man, 



Book xvii. 113 

No tidings of the much-enduring chief 

Ulysses, whether he were yet alive 14° 

Or dead. He therefore sent me with his steeds 

And chariot to the court of Atreus' son, 

The warlike Menelaus. There I saw 

The Argive Helen, for whose sake the Greeks 

And Trojans, by the appointment of the gods, hs 

Suffered so much. The valiant king inquired 

What wish of mine had brought me to the town 

Of hallowed Lacedaemon. I replied, 

And truly told him all, and everything 

In order. Then he answered me, and said : — 15° 

" ' So then ! these men, unwarlike as they are, 
Aspire to occupy a brave man's bed, 
As when a hart hath left two suckling fawnSj 
Just born, asleep in a strong lion's lair, 
And roams for pasturage the mountain slopes 155 

And grassy lawns, the lion suddenly 
Comes back, and makes a cruel end of both, 
So will Ulysses bring a sudden doom 
Upon the suitors. Would to Father Jove, 
And Pallas, and Apollo, that the chief, 160 

Returning mighty, as he was when once 
In well-built Lesbos, at a wrestling-match, 

VOL. H. I J 



1 1 4 The Odyssey. 

He rose to strive with Philomelides, 

And threw him heavily, and all the Greeks 

Rejoiced, — would he might come as then he was ! 165 

Short-lived would then the suitors be, and taste 

A bitter marriage-feast. But now, to come 

To what thou hast inquired, I will not seek 

To turn from it, and talk of other things, 

Nor will deceive. Of all that I was told 17° 

By the Ancient of the Deep, whose words are true, 

I will not hide a single word from thee. 

He saw thy father in an isle, he said, 

A prey to wasting sorrows, and detained, 

Unwilling, in the palace of the nymph 175 

Calypso. To the country of his birth 

He cannot come ; no ships are there with oars 

And crew to bear him o'er the great wide sea.' 

" Thus Menelaus, mighty with the spear, 
The son of Atreus, said. And having now 180 

Fulfilled my errand, I returned. The gods 
Gave favoring winds, and sent me swiftly home." 

He ended, and the queen was deeply moved. 
Then Theoclymenus, the godlike, said : — 

" O gracious consort of Laertes' son, 185 

King Menelaus knew not all. Hear now 



Book xvii. 115 

What I shall say, — for I will prophesy, 

And truly, nor will keep back ought from thee. 

Let Jupiter, the mightiest of the gods, 

And this thy hospitable board, and this «s>° 

The hearth of great Ulysses, where I find 

A refuge, be my witnesses, that now 

Ulysses is in his own land again, 

And sits or walks observant of the deeds 

Of wrong, and planning vengeance, yet to fall 195 

On all the suitors ; such the augury 

Which I beheld when in the gallant bark 

I sat and told it to Telemachus." 

And thus the sage Penelope replied : 
" O stranger ! may thy saying be fulfilled ! «"> 

Then shalt thou have such thanks and such rewards 
That all who greet thee shall rejoice with thee." 

So talked they with each other. In the space 
Before the palace of Ulysses stood 

The suitors, pleased with hurling quoits and spears *o 5 
On the smooth pavement, where their insolence 
So oft was seen. But when the supper-hour 
Was near, and from the fields the cattle came, 
Driven by the herdsmen, Medon — he whom most 
They liked of all the heralds, and who sat «° 



1 1 6 The Odyssey. 

Among them at the feast — bespake them thus : — 

"Youths! since ye now have had your pastime here, 
Come in, and help prepare the evening meal ; 
At the due hour a banquet is not ill." 

He spake ; the suitors hearkened and obeyed, 215 

And rose, and came into the halls, and laid 
Their cloaks upon the benches and the thrones, 
And slaughtered well-fed sheep and fatling goats, 
And made a victim of a pampered brawn, 
And a stalled ox, preparing for the feast. mo 

Meantime Ulysses and that noble hind 
The swineherd hastened to begin their walk 
To town, and thus the master swineherd spake : — 

" Since, stranger, 't is thy wish to pass to-day 
Into the city, as my master bade, — "s 

Though I by far prefer that thou remain 
A guardian of the stalls, yet much I fear 
My master, and am sure that he would chide, 
And harsh the upbraidings of a master are, — 
Let us depart ; the day is now far spent, *3° 

And chill will be the air of eventide." 

Ulysses, the sagacious, answered thus : 
" Enough ; I know ; thy words are heard by one 
Who understands them. Let us then depart. 



Book xvii. 117 

Lead thou the way ; and if thou hast a staff, *35 

Cut from the wood to lean on, give it me, 
Since, as thou say'st, we have a slippery road." 

He spake, and o'er his shoulders flung a scrip, 
Old, cracked, and hanging by a twisted thong. 
Eumsus gave the staff he asked, and both 34° 

Went forth ; the dogs and herdsmen stayed to guard 
The lodge. The swineherd led his master on 
Townward, a squalid beggar to the sight, 
And aged, leaning on a staff, and wrapped 
In sordid rags. There by the rugged way, hs 

As they drew near the town, they passed a fount 
Wrought by the hand of man, and pouring forth 
Its pleasant streams, from which the citizens 
Drew water. Ithacus and Neritus 

Founded it with Polyctor, and a grove 250 

Of alders feeding on the moistened earth 
Grew round it on all sides. The ice-cold rill 
Gushed from a lofty rock, upon whose brow 
An altar stood, at which the passers-by 
Worshipped, and laid their offerings for the Nymphs. »55 
There did Melanthius, son of Dolius, meet 
The twain, as he was driving to the town 
The finest goats of all the flocks, to make 



1 1 8 The Odyssey. 

A banquet for the suitors ; with him went 

Two shepherds, following the flock. As soon *6° 

As he beheld Eumasus and his guest, 

He railed at them with rude and violent words, 

That made the anger of Ulysses rise. 

" See that vile fellow lead the vile about ! 
Thus ever doth some god join like with like. »65 

Thou worthless swineherd ! whither wouldst thou take 
This hungry, haunting beggar-man, this pest 
Of feasts, who at the posts of many a door 
Against them rubs his shoulders, asking crusts. 
Tripods or caldrons never. Shouldst thou leave *7° 

The wretch to me, to watch my stalls, and sweep 
The folds, and bring fresh branches to the kids, 
He might by drinking whey get stouter thighs. 
But he has learned no good, and will refuse 
To work ; he better likes to stroll about *75 

With that insatiable stomach, asking alms 
To fill it. Let me tell thee what is sure 
To happen to him, should he ever come 
Into the palace of the glorious chief 
Ulysses. Many a footstool will be flung 280 

Around him by the hands of those who sit 
As guests, and they will tear the fellow's sides." 



Book xvii. 119 

He spake, and in his folly thrust his heel 
Against the hero's thigh. The blow moved not 
Ulysses from his path, nor swerved he ought, as s 

But meditated whether with a blow 
Of his good staff to take the fellow's life, 
Or lift him in the air and dash his head 
Against the ground. Yet he endured the affront 
And checked his wrath. The swineherd spake, and chid 
The offender, and thus prayed with lifted hands : — »9" 

" Nymphs of the fountain, born to Jupiter ! 
If e'er in sacrifice Ulysses burned 
To you the thighs of lambs and goats, o'erlaid 
With fat, be pleased to grant the prayer I make, 195 

That, guided by some deity, the chief 
May yet return. Then thy rude boasts would cease, 
Melanthius, which thou utterest in thy way 
From place to place while wandering through the town. 
Unfaithful shepherds make a perishing flock." 300 

Melanthius, keeper of the goats, rejoined : — 
" 'T is wonderful how flippant is the cur, 
And shrewd ! But I shall carry him on board 
A good black ship, far off from Ithaca, 
And there will sell him for a goodly price. 305 

Would that Apollo of the silver bow 



120 The Odyssey. 

Might in the palace slay Telemachus 

This very hour, or that the suitors might, 

As certainly as that the day which brings 

Ulysses to his home will never dawn ! " 3 10 

He spake, and left them there. They followed on 
Slowly. Melanthius hastened, and was soon 
At the king's palace gate, and, entering, took 
A seat right opposite Eurymachus, 

Whose favorite he was. The attendants there 315 

Brought meats, the matron of the household bread, 
And both were set before them. Meantime stopped 
Ulysses with the noble swineherd near 
The palace, for around them in the air 
Came the sweet murmurs of a lyre. Just then 3* 

Phemius, the minstrel, had begun his song, 
Ulysses took the swineherd's hand, and said : — 

" Eumasus, this must be the noble pile 
In which Ulysses dwelt, for easily 

'T is known among the others that are near. 3*5 

Rooms over rooms are here; around its court 
Are walls and battlements, and folding-doors 
Shut fast the entrance ; no man may contemn 
Its strength. And I perceive that many guests 
Banquet within ; the smoke of fat goes up, 330 



Book XVII. 121 

And the sweet lyre is heard ; the gods have given 
Its music to accompany the feast." 

And then, Eumsus, thou didst make reply : 
" Thou speakest rightly ? and in other things 
Thou art not slow of thought. Now let us think 335 

What we shall do. First enter, if thou wilt, 
The sumptuous rooms, while I remain without ; 
Or, if it please thee, I will enter first, 
While thou remainest ; yet delay not long, 
Lest some one, seeing thee, should deal a blow, 34° 

Or drive thee hence. I pray thee, think of this." 

Ulysses, the great sufferer, answered thus : 
" Enough ; I know ; thy words are heard by one 
Who understands them. Go before me, then, 
And leave me here. I am not quite unused 34s 

To blows and stripes, and patient is my mood, 
For greatly have I suffered, both at sea 
And in the wars ; and I submit to bear 
This also. But the stomach's eagerness 
Is desperate, and is not to be withstood, 35" 

And many are the mischiefs which it brings 
Upon the race of men ; it fits out fleets 
That cross the barren deep arrayed for war, 
And carry death and woe to hostile realms." 

VOL. II. l6 



122 The Odyssey. 

So talked the twain. A dog was lying near, 355 

And lifted up his head and pricked his ears. 
'T was Argus, which the much-enduring man 
Ulysses long before had reared, but left 
Untried, when for the hallowed town of Troy 
He sailed. The young men oft had led him forth 36° 
In eager chase of wild goats, stags, and hares ; 
But now, his master far away, he lay 
Neglected, just before the stable doors, 
Amid the droppings of the mules and beeves, 
Heaped high till carried to the spacious fields 3*5 

Of which Ulysses was the lord. There lay 
Argus, devoured with vermin. As he saw 
Ulysses drawing near, he wagged his tail 
And dropped his ears, but found that he could come 
No nearer to his master. Seeing this, 37° 

Ulysses wiped away a tear unmarked 
By the good swineherd, whom he questioned thus : — 

" Eumaeus, this I marvel at, — this dog, 
That lies upon the dunghill, beautiful 
In form, but whether in the chase as fleet 375 

As he is fairly shaped I cannot tell. 
Worthless, perchance, as house-dogs often are, 
Whose masters keep them for the sake of show." 



Book xvil - 123 

And thus, Eumsus, thou didst make reply : 
" The dog belongs to one who died afar. 38° 

Had he the power of limb which once he had 
For feats of hunting when Ulysses sailed 
For Troy and left him, thou wouldst be amazed 
Both at his swiftness and his strength. No beast 
In the thick forest depths which once he saw, 3»s 

Or even tracked by footprints, could escape. 
And now he is a sufferer, since his lord 
Has perished far from his own land. No more 
The careless women heed the creature's wants ; 
For, when the master is no longer near, 39° 

The servants cease from their appointed tasks, 
And on the day that one becomes a slave 
The Thunderer, Jove, takes half his worth away." 

He spake, and, entering that fair dwelling-place, 
Passed through to where the illustrious suitors sat, 395 

While over Argus the black night of death 
Came suddenly as soon as he had seen 
Ulysses, absent now for twenty years. 
Telemachus, the godlike, was the first 
To mark the swineherd coming through the hall, 400 

And, nodding, called to him. The swineherd looked 
About him, and beheld a seat on which 



124 The Odyssey. 

The carver of the feast was wont to sit, 

Distributing the meats. He bore it thence 

And placed it opposite Telemachus, 405 

And at his table. Then he sat him down, 

And thither came the herald, bringing him 

A portion of the feast, and gave him bread 

From the full canister. Soon after him 

Ulysses entered, seemingly an old 41° 

And wretched beggar, propped upon a staff, 

And wrapped in sordid weeds. He sat him down 

On the ashen threshold, just within the doors, 

And leaned against a shaft of cypress-wood, 

Which some artificer had skilfully 415 

Wrought by a line, and smoothed. Telemachus 

Called to the swineherd, bade him come, and took 

A loaf that lay in the fair canister, 

And all the flesh which his two hands could grasp. 

" Bear this to yonder stranger ; bid him go 4*0 

And ask a dole from every suitor here. 
No beggar should be bashful in his need." 

He spake, the hind obeyed, and, drawing near 
Ulysses, said to him in winged words : — 

" These from Telemachus, who bids thee ask 42s 

A dole from every suitor, for hie says 



Book xvii. 125 

No beggar should be bashful in his need." 

Ulysses, the sagacious, answered thus : 
" May Jove, the sovereign, make Telemachus 
A happy man among the sons of men, 430 

And grant him all his heart desires in life! " 

He spake, and took the gift in both his hands, 
And laid it down upon his tattered scrip 
Close to his feet. Then, while the poet sang, 
He ate, and, just as he had supped, the bard 435 

Closed his divine recital. Then ensued 
Great clamor in the hall, but Pallas came 
And moved Ulysses to arise, and ask 
From every suitor there a dole of bread, 
That he might know the better from the worse, 44° 

Though none were to be spared. From right to left 
He took his way, and asked of every man, 
With outstretched hand, as if he had been long 
A beggar. And they pitied him, and gave, 
And looked at him with wonder, and inquired 44s 

One of another who he was, and whence. 
Then spake Melanthius, keeper of the goats : — 

" Give ear, ye suitors of the illustrious queen. 
As to this stranger, I have seen him once. 
The swineherd brought him ; but I know him not, 45° 



126 The Odyssey. 

And of what race he is I cannot tell." 

He spake ; Antinoiis chid the swineherd thus : — 

"Why hast thou brought him, too well known thyself? 

Have we not vagabonds enough ? enough 

Of sturdy beggars, pests of every feast. 455 

Or is it a light matter that they throng 

Hither to waste the substance of thy lord, 

And therefore thou art with this fellow here ? " 
And thus, Eumasus, thou didst make reply : 

" Antinoiis, high as is thy station, thou 460 

Hast spoken ill. What man goes ever forth 

To bid a stranger to his house, unless 

The stranger be of those whose office is 

To serve the people, be he seer, or leech, 

Or architect, or poet heaven-inspired, 465 

Whose song is gladly heard ? All these are called 

To feasts wherever men are found ; but none 

Call in the poor, to live upon their means. 

Antinoiis, thou, of all the suitor-train, 

Dost ever with the greatest harshness treat 47° 

The servants of Ulysses, chiefly me. 

I heed it not while sage Penelope 

Dwells in the palace with her godlike son." 
Then interposed discreet Telemachus : 



Book xrn. 127 

" Nay, have no strife of words with him, I pray. 475 

Antinoiis takes delight in bitter words, 

And rails, and stirs up railing in the rest." 

And then he turned, and thus with winged words 

Bespake Antinoiis : " Truly thou dost care 

For me as might a father for a son, 480 

Bidding me drive a stranger from my door 

With violent words, — which God forbid. Take now 

Somewhat and give to him. I grudge it not, 

Nay, I advise it. Fear not to offend 

My mother, or displease a single one 485 

Of all the household of the godlike chief, 

Ulysses. But thou hast no thought of this. 

It suits thee best to feast and never give." 

Antinoiis thus rejoined: "O utterer 
Of big and braggart words ! Telemachus, 49° 

If all the other suitors would bestow 
As much as I will, he would not be seen 
Within these halls for three months yet to come." 

So speaking, he brought forward to the sight, 
From underneath the board, a stool, on which 49s 

Rested his dainty feet. The others all 
Gave somewhat to Ulysses, till his scrip 
Was filled with meat and bread. Then as he went 



128 The Odyssey. 

Back to the threshold, there to feast on what 

The Greeks had given him in his rounds, he stopped 5°° 

Beside Antinoiis, and bespake him thus : — 

" Give somewhat also, friend. Thou dost not seem 
One of the humbler rank among the Greeks, 
But of the highest. Kingly is thy look ; 
It therefore will become thee to bestow 5°5 

More freely than the rest, and I will sound 
Thy praise through all the earth. Mine too was once 
A happy lot, for I inhabited 
A palace filled with goods, and often gave 
To wanderers, whosoever they might be 5'° 

That sought me out, and in whatever need. 
And I had many servants, and large store 
Of everything by which men live at ease 
And are accounted rich. Saturnian Jove — 
Such was his pleasure — brought me low; for, moved 5'5 
By him, I joined me to a wandering band 
Of pirates, and to my perdition sailed 
Upon a distant voyage to the coast 
Of Egypt. In the river of that land 
I stationed my good ships, and bade my men s*> 

Remain with them and watch them well. I placed 
Sentries upon the heights. Yet confident 



Book xvn. 129 

In their own strength, and rashly giving way 

To greed, my comrades ravaged the fair fields 

Of the Egyptians, slew them, and bore off 525 

Their wives and little ones. The rumor reached 

The city soon ; the people heard the alarm 

And came together. With the dawn of day 

All the great plain was thronged with horse and foot, 

And gleamed with brass, while Jove, the Thunderer, sent 

A deadly fear into our ranks, where none S3> 

Dared face the foe. On every side was death. 

The Egyptians hewed down many with the sword, 

And some they led away alive to toil 

For them in slavery. Me my captors gave 53s 

Into a stranger's hands, upon his way 

To Cyprus, where he reigned, a mighty king, 

Demetor, son of Jasus. Thence at last 

I came through many hardships to this isle." 

Antinoiis lifted up his voice, and said : 54° 

" What god hath sent this nuisance to disturb 
The banquet ? Take thyself to the mid-hall, 
Far from thy table, else expect to see 
An Egypt and a Cyprus of a sort 

That thou wilt little like. Thou art a bold 545 

And shameless beggar. Thou dost take thy round 

VOL. II. 17 



130 The Odyssey. 

And ask from each, and foolishly they give, 
And spare not nor consider ; well supplied 
Is each, and freely gives what is not his." 

Then sage Ulysses said as he withdrew : 55° 

" 'T is strange ; thy mind agrees not with thy form. 
Thou wouldst not give a suppliant even salt 
In thine own house, — thou who, while sitting here, 
Fed at another's table, canst not bear 
To give me bread from thy well-loaded board." 555 

He spake. Alcinoiis grew more angry stilly 
And frowned and answered him with winged words : — 

" Dealer in saucy words ! I hardly think 
That thou wilt leave this palace unchastised." 

He spake, and raised the footstool in his hand, 56° 

And smote Ulysses on the lower part 
Of the right shoulder. Like a rock he stood* 
Unmoved beneath the blow Antinous gave* 
But shook his head in silence as he thought 
Of vengeance. Then, returning, he sat down 565 

Upon the threshold, where he laid his scrip 
Well filled, and thus bespake the suitor-train : — 

" Hear me, ye suitors of the illustrious queen. 
Grief or resentment no man feels for blows 
Received by him while fighting for his own, — 570 



Book xvn. 131 

His beeves or white-woolled sheep. But this man here, 

Antinoiis, dealt that blow on me because 

I have an empty stomach ; hunger brings 

Great mischiefs upon men. If there be gods 

Or furies who avenge the poor, may death 575 

O'ertake Antinoiis ere his marriage-day ! " 

He ended. Then again Eupeithes' son, 
Antinoiis, spake : " Eat, stranger, quietly ; 
Sit still, or get thee hence ; our young men else 
Who hear thy words will seize thee by the feet 580 

Or hands, and drag thee forth and flay thee there." 

He spake, and greatly were the rest incensed, 
And one of those proud youths took up the word : — 

" Antinoiis, it was ill of thee to smite 
That hapless wanderer. Madman ! what if he 58s 

Came down from heaven and were a god ! The gods 
Put on the form of strangers from afar, 
And walk our towns in many different shapes, 
To mark the good and evil deeds of men." 

Thus spake the suitors, but he heeded not 59° 

Their words. Telemachus, who saw the blow, 
Felt his heart swell with anger and with grief, 
Yet from his eyelids fell no tear; he shook 
His head in silence, pondering to repay 



132 The Odyssey. 

The wrong. Meantime the sage Penelope 595 

Heard of the stranger smitten in her halls, 
And thus bespake the maidens of her train : — 

" Would that Apollo, mighty with the bow, 
Might smite thee also ! " Then Eurynome, 
The matron of the household, said in turn : 600 

" O, were our prayers but heard, not one of these 
Should look upon the golden morn again ! " 

Then spake again the sage Penelope : 
" Mother, they all are hateful ; every one 
Plots mischief, but Antinous most of all ; 605 

And he is like black death, to be abhorred. 
A friendless stranger passes through these halls, 
Compelled by need, and asks an alms of each, 
And all the others give, and fill his scrip ; 
Antinous flings a footstool, and the blow 610 

Bruises the shoulder of the suppliant man." 

So talked they with each other where they sat 
In the queen's chamber, 'mid the attendant train 
Of women, while meantime Ulysses took 
The evening meal. The queen then bade to call 615 

The noble swineherd, and bespake him thus : — 

" My worthy friend Eumsus, go and bring 
The stranger hither. I would speak with him, 



Book xvii. 133 

And ask if anywhere he saw or heard 
Ought of Ulysses; for he seems like one 620 

Whose wanderings have been in many lands." 
And thus, Eumasus, thou didst make reply : 
"Would that these Greeks, O queen, would hold their 

peace, 
Then might this stranger in thy hearing speak 
Words full of consolation. For three nights 6z S 

I had him with me, for three days I made 
My lodge his home, — for at the very first 
He came to me, escaping from his ship, — 
Nor when he left me had he told of all 
That he had suffered. As a hearer looks 63° 

Upon a minstrel whom the gods have taught 
To sing the poems that delight all hearts, 
And, listening, longs to listen without end ; 
So, as the stranger sat beneath my roof, 
He held me charmed. He was the ancestral friend, 635 
He said, of thy Ulysses, and his home 
Was Crete, where dwells the stock of Minos yet. 
From Crete he came, and much had suffered since, 
Driven on from place to place. And he had heard 
Some tidings of Ulysses yet alive — 6 +° 

So he affirmed — in a rich region near 



134 The Odyssey. 

The realm of the Thesprotians, and prepared 
To bring much riches to his native isle." 

Then spake the sage Penelope again : 
"Go, call him hither, that he may relate 645 

His story in my presence. Let these men, 
As it may please them, sitting at our gates 
Or in our halls, amuse themselves, for light 
Are they of heart. Unwasted in their homes 
Lie their possessions, and their bread and wine 65° 

Are only for their servants, while themselves 
Frequent our palace, day by day, and slay 
Our beeves and sheep and fading goats, and feast, 
And drink abundantly the dark red wine, 
And all with lavish waste. No man is here, 655 

Such as Ulysses was, to drive away 
This pest from our abode. Should he return 
To his own land, he and his son would take 
Swift vengeance on the men who do him wrong." 

She ended. Suddenly Telemachus 660 

Sneezed loudly, so that all the palace rang ; 
And, laughing as she heard, Penelope 
Bespake Eumasus thus with winged words : — 

" Go, call the stranger. Dost thou not perceive 
My son has sneezed as to confirm my words, "5 



Book xvn. 135 

Not unfulfilled will now remain the doom 

That waits the suitors ; none will now escape 

Death and the Fates. This further let me say, 

And thou remember it ; if what he tells 

Be true, I will bestow on him a change 67° 

Of fair attire, a tunic and a cloak." 

She spake, the swineherd went, and, drawing near 
Ulysses, said to him in winged words : — 

" Stranger and father, sage Penelope, 
The mother of the prince, hath sent for thee. 675 

Though sorrowing, she is minded to inquire 
What of her husband thou canst haply say ; 
And should she find that all thy words are true, 
She will bestow a tunic and a cloak, 
Garments which much thou needest. For thy food, 68° 
What will appease thy hunger thou wilt find 
Among the people ; ask, and each will give." 

Ulysses, much enduring man, replied : 
"Eumasus, faithfully will I declare 

All that I know to sage Penelope, 68 5 

The daughter of Icarius. Well I knew 
Her husband, and with like calamities 
We both have suffered. But I greatly dread 
This reckless suitor-crew, whose riotous acts 



136 The Odyssey. 

And violence reach to the iron heavens. 69° 

Even now, when that man dealt me, as I passed, 

A painful blow, though I had done no harm, 

None interposed, not even Telemachus, 

In my defence. Now, therefore, ask, I pray, 

Penelope that she will deign to wait 695 

Till sunset in her rooms, though strong her wish 

To hear my history. Of her husband then, 

And his return, she may inquire, while I 

Sit by the blazing hearth ; for scant have been 

My garments, as thou knowest, since the day 7°° 

When first I came, a suppliant, to thy door." 

He spake ; the swineherd went, and as he crossed 
The threshold of Penelope she said : — 

" Thou bringst him not, Eumzeus ? What may be 
The wanderer's scruple ? Fear of some one here ? 7°s 
Or in a palace is he filled with awe ? 
To be a bashful beggar is most hard." 

And thus, Euniceus, thou didst answer her : — 
" Rightly he speaks, and just as one would think 
Who shuns the encounter of disorderly men. 71° 

He prays that thou wilt wait till set of sun ; 
And better were it for thyself, O queen, 
To speak with him and hear his words alone." 



Book xvii. 137 

Then spake discreet Penelope again : 
"Whoe'er may be the stranger, not unwise 715 

He seems ; for nowhere among men are done 
Such deeds of wrong and outrage as by these." 

She spake, and the good swineherd, having told 
The lady all, went forth among the crowd 
Of suitors, drawing near Telemachus, 7*° 

And bowed his head beside him that none else 
Might hear, and said to him in winged words : — 

" I go, my friend, to tend the swine and guard 
What there thou hast, thy sustenance and mine. 
The charge of what is here belongs to thee. 72s 

Be thy first care to save thyself, and watch 
To see that mischief overtake thee not, — 
For many are the Achaians plotting it, 
Whom Jove destroy ere we become their prey ! " 

Then spake discreet Telemachus in turn : 73° 

" So be it, father, and, when thou hast supped, 
Depart, but with the morning come, and bring 
Choice victims for the sacrifice. The care 
Of all things here is with the gods and me." 

He spake ; the swineherd sat him down again 735 

Upon his polished seat, and satisfied 
His appetite and thirst with food and wine. 

VOL. II. l8 



J 38 The Odyssey. 

Then he departed to his herd, and left 
The palace and the court before it thronged 
With revellers, who gave the hour to song, 
And joined the dance ; for evening now was come. 



74° 



BOOK XV1I1. 

"INHERE came a common beggar, wont to ask 

Alms through the town of Ithaca, well known 
For greediness of stomach, gluttonous 
And a wine-bibber, but of little strength 
And courage, though he seemed of powerful mould. 5 
Arnasus was the name which at his birth 
His mother gave him, but the young men called 
The fellow Irus, for it was his wont 
To go on errands, as a messenger, 

When he was ordered. Coming now, he thought 10 

To drive Ulysses out of his own house, 
And railed at him, and said in winged words : — 

" Hence with thee ! leave the porch, old man, at once, 
Lest thou be taken by the foot and dragged 
Away from it. Dost thou not see how all «s 

Around us nod, to bid me drag thee out ? 
I am ashamed to do it. Rise and go, 
Else haply we may have a strife of blows." 



140 The Odyssey. 

Ulysses, the sagacious, frowned and said : 
" Wretch ! there is nothing that I do or say *> 

To harm thee aught. I do not envy thee 
What others give thee, though the dole be large ; 
And ample is this threshold for us both. 
Nor shouldst thou envy others, for thou seemst 
A straggler like myself. The gods bestow 25 

Wealth where they list. But do not challenge me 
To blows, lest, aged as I am, thou rouse 
My anger, and I make thy breast and lips 
Hideous with blood. To-morrow then will be 
A quiet day for me, since thou, I trust, 3° 

In all the time to come, wilt nevermore 
Enter the palace of Laertes' son." 

The beggar Irus angrily rejoined : 
" Ye gods ! this glutton prattles volubly, 
Like an old woman at the chimney-side. 35 

Yet could I do him mischief, smiting him 
On both his sides, and dashing from his cheeks 
The teeth to earth, as men are wont to deal 
With swine that eat the wheat. Now gird thyself, 
Let these men see us fighting. How canst thou 4° 

Think to contend with one so young as I ? " 

Thus fiercely did they wrangle as they stood 



Book xvni. 141 

Beside the polished threshold and before 

The lofty gates. The stout Antinoiis heard, 

And, laughing heartily, bespake the rest : — 45 

" Here, friends, is what we never yet have had. 
Behold the pleasant pastime which the gods 
Provide for us. These men — the stranger here, 
And Irus — quarrel, and will come to blows. 
Let us stand by and bring the combat on." 5° 

He spake. All rose with laughter and came round 
The ragged beggars, while Eupeithes' son, 
Antinoiis, in these words harangued the rest : — 

"Ye noble suitors, hear me. At the fire 
Already lie the paunches of two goats, 55 

Preparing for our evening meal, and both 
Are filled with fat and blood. Whoever shows 
Himself the better man in this affray, 
And conquers, he shall take the one of these 
He chooses, and shall ever afterward 60 

Feast at our table, and no man but he 
Shall ever come among us asking alms." 

He ended. All approved his words, and thus 
Ulysses, craftily dissembling, said : — 

" O friends, it is not well that one so old 65 

As I, and broken by calamity, 



142 The Odyssey. 

Should fight a younger man ; but hunger bids, 

And I may be o'ercome by blows. But now 

Swear all a solemn oath, that none of you, 

To favor Irus, wickedly will raise 7° 

His mighty hand to smite me, and so aid 

My adversary to my overthrow." 

He spake ; the suitor-train, assenting, took 
The oath, and when they all were duly sworn, 
The high-born prince Telemachus began : — 75 

" O stranger, if thy manly heart be moved 
To drive him hence, fear no one else of all 
The Achaians. Whosoever strikes at thee 
Has many to contend with. I am here 
The host. Antinoiis and Eurymachus, 80 

Wise men and kings, agree with me in this." 

He spake, and all approved. Ulysses drew 
And girt his tatters round his waist and showed 
His large and shapely thighs. Unclothed appeared 
His full broad shoulders, and his manly breast »s 

And sinewy arms. Minerva stood by him, 
And with a mighty breadth of limb endued 
The shepherd of the people. Earnestly 
The suitors gazed, and wondered at the sight, 
And each one, turning to his neighbor, said : — 9° 



Book xviii. 143 

" Irus, poor Irus, on himself has drawn 
An evil fate, for what a sinewy thigh 
His adversary shows beneath his rags ! " 

So talked they, while the heart of Irus sank 
Within him ; yet the attendants girding him 95 

Forcibly drew him forward, sore afraid, 
The muscles quivering over every limb. 
And then Antinoiis spake, and chid him thus : — 

"Now, boaster, thou deservest not to live, 
Nay, nor to have been born, if thou dost fear 100 

And quake at meeting one so old as he, 
So broken with the hardships he has borne. 
And now I tell thee what will yet be done, 
Should he approve himself the better man, 
And conquer. I will have thee sent on board i°s 

A galley to Epirus, and its king, 
The foe of all men living, Echetus, 
And he will pare away thy nose and ears 
With the sharp steel, and, wrenching out the parts 
Of shame, will cast them to be torn by dogs." no 

He spake, and Irus shook through all his frame 
With greater terror, yet they dragged him on 
Into the midst. Both champions lifted up 
Their arms. The godlike, much-enduring man, 



144 The Odyssey. 

Ulysses, pondered whether so to strike "5 

His adversary that the breath of life 

Might leave him as he fell, or only smite 

To stretch him on the earth. As thus he mused, 

The lighter blow seemed wisest, lest the Greeks 

Should know who dealt it. When the hands of both i» 

Were thus uplifted, Irus gave a blow 

On his right shoulder, while Ulysses smote 

Irus beneath the ear, and broke the bone 

Within, and brought the red blood from his mouth. 

He fell amid the dust, and shrieked and gnashed 125 

His teeth, and beat with jerking feet the ground. 

The suitor-train threw up their hands and laughed 

Till breathless, while Ulysses seized his feet 

And drew him o'er the threshold to the court 

And the porch doors, and there, beside the wall, 130 

Set him to lean against it, gave a staff 

Into his hands, and said in winged words: — 

" Sit there, and scare away the dogs and swine, 
But think not, wretched creature, to bear rule 
Over the stranger and the beggar tribe, 13s 

Or worse than this may happen to thee yet." 

He spake, and o'er his shoulders threw the scrip 
That yawned with chinks, and by a twisted thong 



Book xviii. 145 

Was fastened ; then he turned to take his seat 

Upon the threshold, while the suitor-train 140 

Went back into the palace with gay shouts 

Of laughter, and bespake him blandly thus : — 

" Stranger, may Jove and all the other gods 
Grant thee what thou desirest, and whate'er 
Is pleasant to thee ! Thou hast put an end 145 

To this importunate beggar's rounds among 
The people. We shall send him off at once 
Into Epirus, and to Echetus, 
Its king, the foe of every living man." 

So talked the suitors, and the omen made 150 

Ulysses glad. Meantime Antinoiis placed 
The mighty paunch before the victor, filled 
With blood and fat, and from the canister 
Amphinomus brought forth two loaves, and raise 
A golden cup and drank to him, and said : — 155 

" Hail, guest and father ! happy be thy days 
Henceforth, though dark with many sorrows now ! " 

Ulysses, the sagacious, answered thus : — 
" Amphinomus, thou seemest most discreet, 
And such thy father is, of whom I hear 160 

A worshipful report, the good and rich 
Dulichian Nisus. Thou, as I am told, 

VOL. II. 19 



146 The Odyssey. 

Art son to him, and thou art seemingly 

A man of pertinent speech. I therefore say 

To thee, and bid thee hear and mark me well, ^5 

No being whom earth nourishes to breathe 

Her air and move upon her face is more 

The sport of circumstance than man. For while 

The gods give health, and he is strong of limb, 

He thinks no evil in the coming days «7° 

Will overtake him. When the blessed gods 

Visit him with afflictions, these he bears 

Impatiently and with a fretful mind. 

Such is the mood of man, while yet he dwells 

On earth ; it changes as the All-Father gives 17s 

The sunshine or withholds it. I was once 

Deemed fortunate among my fellow-men, 

And many things that were unjust I did ; 

For in my strength and in my father's power, 

And valor of my brothers, I had put 180 

My trust. Let no man, therefore, dare to be 

Unjust in aught, but tranquilly enjoy 

Whatever good the gods vouchsafe to give. 

Yet are these suitors guilty of foul wrong, 

Wasting the substance and dishonoring 185 

The wife of one who will not, as I deem, 



Book xviii. 147 

Remain long distant from his friends and home, 
But is already near. O, may some god 
Remove thee from this danger to thy home ! 
Nor mayst thou meet him when he shall return 19° 

To his own land. For when he comes once more 
Beneath this roof, and finds the suitors here, 
Not without bloodshed will their parting be." 
He spake, and, pouring out a part, he drank 
The wine, and gave the goblet to the prince, 19s 

Who crossed the hall, and sorrowfully shook 
His head, for now already did his heart 
Forebode the coming evil. Not by this 
Did he escape his death. Minerva laid 
A snare for him, that he might fall beneath, *oo 

The strong arm of Telemachus. He went 
And took the seat from which he lately rose. 
Then blue-eyed Pallas moved Penelope, 

Sage daughter of Icarius, to appear 

Before the suitors, that their base intent 

Might be more fully seen, and she might win 

More honor from her husband and her son. 

Wherefore she forced a laugh, and thus began : — 
" Eurynome, I would at length appear, 

Though not till now, before the suitor-train, 



205 



148 The Odyssey. 

Detested as they are. I there would speak 

A word of timely warning to my son, 

And give him counsel not to trust himself 

Too much among the suitors, who are fair 

In speech, but mean him foully in their hearts." 215 

Eurynome, the household matron, said : 
" Assuredly, my child, thou speakest well. 
Go now, and warn thy son, and keep back naught. 
First bathe, and, ere thou go, anoint thy cheeks, 
Nor show them stained with tears. It is not well »*> 

To sorrow without end. For now thy son 
Is grown, and thou beholdest him at length 
What thou didst pray the gods, when he was born, 
That he might yet become, a bearded man." 

And then the sage Penelope rejoined : "s 

" Though anxious for my sake, persuade me not, 
Eurynome, to bathe, nor to anoint 
My cheeks with oil. The gods inhabiting 
Olympus took away their comeliness 

When in his roomy ships my husband sailed ; *3° 

But bid Antinoe come, and call with her 
Hippodameia, that they both may stand 
Beside me in the hall. I will not go 
Alone among the men, for very shame." 



Book xviil 149 

She spake, the aged dame went forth to bear 235 

The message, and to bring the women back. 
While blue-eyed Pallas had yet other cares, 
She brought a balmy sleep, and shed it o'er 
The daughter of Icarius, as she lay 

Reclined upon her couch, her limbs relaxed ' 240 

In rest. The glorious goddess gave a dower 
Of heavenly graces, that the Achaian chiefs 
Might look on her amazed. She lighted up 
Her fair face with a beauty all divine, 
Such as the queenly Cytherea wears 245 

When in the mazes of the dance she joins 
The Graces. Then she made her to the sight 
Of loftier stature and of statelier size, 
And fairer than the ivory newly carved. 
This having done, the gracious power withdrew, 25° 

While from the palace came the white-armed maids, 
And prattled as they came. The balmy sleep 
Forsook their mistress at the sound. She passed 
Her hands across her cheeks, and thus she spake : — 

" 'T was a sweet sleep that, in my wretchedness, 255 
Wrapped me just now. Would that, this very hour, 
The chaste Diana by so soft a death 
Might end me, that my days might be no more 



150 The Odyssey. 

Consumed in sorrow for a husband lost, 

Of peerless worth, the noblest of the Greeks." 260 

She spake, and from the royal bower went down, 
Yet not alone ; two maidens went with her. 
And when that most august of womankind 
Drew near the suitors, at the door she stopped 
Of that magnificent hall, and o'er her cheeks *6 5 

Let fall the lustrous veil, while on each side 
A modest maiden stood. The suitors all 
Felt their knees tremble, and were sick with love, 
And all desired her. Then the queen bespake 
Telemachus, her well-beloved son : — *7° 

" Telemachus, thy judgment is not firm, 
Nor dost thou think aright. While yet a boy 
Thy thought was wiser. Now that thou art grown, 
And on the verge of manhood, so that one 
Who comes from far and sees thy noble part »7S 

And stature well may say thou art the son 
Of a most fortunate father, yet to think 
And judge discreetly thou art not as then, 
For what a deed is this which has been done 
Even here ! Thou hast allowed a stranger guest *s° 

To be assaulted rudely. How is this ? 
If one who sits a guest beneath our roof 



Book xvin. 151 

Be outraged thus, be sure it brings to thee 
Great shame and rank dishonor among men." 

To this discreet Telemachus replied : 185 

" Mother, I cannot take it ill that thou 
Shouldst be offended. But of many things 
I have a clear discernment, and can weigh 
The good and bad. I was till now a child, 
Yet even now I cannot always see 19° 

The wiser course. These men bewilder me, 
As, sitting side by side, they lay their plots 
Against me, and I have no helper here. 
When Irus and the stranger fought, the strife 
Had no such issue as the suitors wished. *95 

The stranger conquered. Would to Father Jove, 
To Pallas and Apollo, that the crew 
Of suitors here might sit with nodding heads 
Struck down upon the spot, within these halls 
Or in the courts, and all with powerless limbs, 3°° 

As Irus sits beside the gate and nods, 
Like one o'ercome with wine, nor can he stand 
Upon his feet, nor go to where he dwells, 
If home he has, so feeble are his limbs." 

So talked the twain awhile ; then interposed 3°5 

Eurymachus, and thus bespake the queen : — 



152 The Odyssey. 

" Sage daughter of Icarius ! if all those 
Who in Iasian Argos have their homes 
Should once behold thee, a still larger crowd 
Of suitors would to-morrow come and feast 310 

Within thy halls, so much dost thou excel 
In mind and form and face all womankind." 

To this the sage Penelope replied : 
" Eurymachus, the immortals took away 
Such grace of form and face as once was mine, 315 

What time the sons of Argos sailed for Troy, 
And with them went Ulysses, my espoused. 
Should he return, and take again in charge 
My household, greater would my glory be, 
And prized more highly. I am wretched now, 320 

Such woes the gods have heaped upon my head. 
He, when he left his native island, grasped 
My right hand at the wrist, and said to me : 
' Think not, dear wife, that all the well-armed Greeks 
Will come back safe from Troy. The Trojan men, 3*5 
They say, are brave in war, expert to cast 
The spear and wing the arrow, skilled to rein 
The rapid steeds by which the bloody strife 
Of battle-fields is hurried to its close; 
And therefore whether God will bring me back, 330 



Book xviii. 153 

Or I shall fall in Troy, I cannot know. 

Take charge of all things here. I leave with thee 

My father and my mother in these halls. 

Be kind to them as now, nay, more than now, 

Since I shall not be here. When thou shalt see 335 

My son a bearded man, take to thyself 

A husband, whom thou wilt, and leave thy house.' 

Such were his words, and they have been fulfilled. 

The night will come in which I must endure 

This hateful marriage, wretched that I am, 34° 

To whom the will of Jupiter forbids 

All consolation, and this bitter thought 

Weighs evermore upon my heart and soul. 

The custom was not thus in other times ; 

When suitors wooed a noble wife, the child 34s 

Of some rich house, contending for her smile, 

They came with beeves and fading sheep to feast 

The damsel's friends, and gave munificent gifts, 

But wasted not the wealth that was not theirs." 

She spake, Ulysses was rejoiced to see 350 

That thus she sought to draw from each a gift, 
With fair and artful words. Yet were his thoughts 
Intent on other plans. Eupeithes' son, 
Antinoiis, thus made answer to the queen : — 

VOL. It. 20 



154 The Odyssey. 

" Sage daughter of Icarius, only deign 35s 

To take the gifts which any of the Greeks 
Will bring, — nor is it gracious to reject 
A present, — yet be sure we go not hence, 
To our estates nor elsewhere, till thou make 
A bridegroom of the best Achaian here." ifo 

So spake Antinoiis. All approved his words, 
And each sent forth a herald for his gift. 
The herald of Antinoiis brought to him 
A robe of many colors, beautiful 

And ample, with twelve golden clasps, which each 365 
Had its well-fitted eye. Eurymachus 
Received a golden necklace, richly wrought, 
And set with amber beads, that glowed as if 
With sunshine. To Eurydamas there came 
A pair of ear-rings, each a triple gem, 370 

Daintily fashioned and of exquisite grace. 
Two servants bore them. From Pisander's house — 
Son of the Prince Polyctor — there was brought 
A collar of rare beauty. Thus did each 
Bestow a different yet becoming gift. 375 

And then that most august of women went 
Back to the upper chambers with her maids, 
Who bore the sumptuous presents, while below 



Book xviii. 155 

The suitors turned them to the dance and song, 
Amused till evening came. Its darkness stole 380 

Over their pastime. Then they brought and placed 
Three hearths to light the palace, heaping them 
With wood, well dried and hard and newly cleft. 
With this they mingled flaming brands. The maids 
Of the great sufferer, Ulysses, fed 385 

The fire by turns. To them the hero spake : — 

" Ye maidens of a sovereign absent long, 
Withdraw to where your high-born mistress sits; 
There turn the spindle, seeking to amuse 
Her lonely hours ; there comb with your own hands 39° 
The fleece, and I will see that these have light. 
Even though they linger till the Morn is here 
In her bright car, they cannot overcome 
My patience. I am practised to endure." 

So spake he, and the maidens, as they heard, 39s 

Cast at each other meaning looks, and laughed, 
And one Melantho, of the rosy cheeks, 
Railed at him impudently. She was born 
To Dolius, but Penelope had reared 

The damsel as a daughter of her own, 4°° 

And given her, for her pleasure, many things ; 
Yet for the sorrows of Penelope 



156 The Odyssey. 

Melantho little cared. Eurymachus 

Had made the girl his paramour. She spake, 

And chid Ulysses with unmannerly words : — 405 

" Outlandish wretch ! thou must be one whose brain 
Is turned, since thou wilt neither go to sleep 
Within a smithy, nor in any place 
Of public shelter, but wilt stay and prate 
Among this company with no restraint 41° 

Or reverence. Either wine has stolen away 
Thy senses, or thy natural mood, perchance, 
Prompts thee to chatter idly. Art thou proud 
Of conquering Irus, that poor vagabond ? 
Beware lest some one of robuster arms 415 

Than Irus seize and thrust thee out of doors 
With a bruised head and face begrimed with blood." 

The sage Ulysses frowned on her and said : 
" Impudent one, Telemachus shall hear 
From me the saucy words which thou hast said, 420 

And he will come and hew thee limb from limb." 

He spake ; the damsels, frightened at his words, 
Fled through the hall, and shook in every limb 
With terror, lest his threat should be fulfilled. 
He meantime stood beside the kindled hearths 42s 

And fed the flames, and, looking on the crowd 



Book xviil 157 

Of suitors, brooded in his secret heart 

O'er plans that would not fail to be fulfilled. 

But Pallas suffered not the suitors yet 
To cease from railing speeches, all the more 43° 

To wound the spirit of Laertes' son. 
Eurymachus, the son of Polybus, 
Began to scoff at him, and thus he spake 
To wake the ready laughter of the rest : — 

" Hear me, ye suitors of the illustrious queen. 435 

I speak the thought that comes into my mind. 
Led by some god, no doubt, this man has come 
Into the palace ; for the light we have 
Of torches seems to issue from the crown 
Of his bald pate, a head without a hair." 440 

So said Eurymachus, and then bespake 
■Ulysses, the destroyer of walled towns : — 

" Stranger, if I accept thee, wilt thou serve 
Upon the distant parts of my estate ? 

There shalt thou have fair wages, and shalt bring 445 

The stones in heaps together, and shalt plant 
Tall trees, and I will feed thee through the year, 
And give thee clothes, and sandals for thy feet. 
But thou art used, no doubt, to idle ways, 
And never dost thou work with willing hands, 45° 



158 The Odyssey. 

But dost prefer to roam the town and beg, 
Purveying for thy gluttonous appetite." 

Ulysses, the sagacious, answered thus : — 
" Eurymachus, if we were matched in work 
Against each other in the time of spring 455 

When days are long, and both were mowing grass, 
And I had a curved scythe in hand and thou 
Another, that we might keep up the strife 
Till nightfall, fasting, 'mid the abundant grass ; 
Or if there were a yoke of steers to drive, 46° 

The sturdiest of their kind, sleek, large, well fed, 
Of equal age, and equal strength to bear 
The labor, and both strong, and if the field 
Were of four acres, with a soil through which 
The plough could cleave its way, — then shouldst thou see 
How evenly my furrow would be turned. 466 

Or should the son of Saturn send to-day 
War from abroad, and I had but a shield, 
Two spears, and, fitted to my brows, a helm 
Of brass, thou wouldst behold me pressing on 47° 

Among the foremost warriors, and would see 
No cause to rail at my keen appetite. 
But arrogantly thou dost bear thyself, 
And pitilessly ; thou in thine own eyes 



Book XV in. 159 

Art great and mighty, since thou dost consort 475 

With few, and those are not the best of men. 
Yet should Ulysses come to his own land, 
These gates that seem so wide would suddenly 
Become too narrow for thee in thy flight." 

He spake. Eurymachus grew yet more wroth, 480 

And frowned on him, and said in winged words : — 

" Wretch ! I shall do thee mischief. Thou art bold, 
And babblest unabashed among us all. 
The wine, perhaps, is in thy foolish head, 
Or thou art always thus, and ever prone 485 

To prattle impudently. Art thou proud 
Of conquering Irus, that poor vagabond ? " 

Thus having said, he brandished in the air 
A footstool ; but Ulysses, to escape 

The anger of Eurymachus, sat down 490 

Before the knees of the Dulichian prince, 
Amphinomus. The footstool flew, and struck 
On the right arm the cupbearer. Down fell 
The beaker ringing ; he who bore it lay 
Stretched in the dust. Then in those shadowy halls 495 
The suitors rose in tumult. One of them 
Looked at another by his side, and said : — 

" Would that this vagabond had met his death 



160 The Odyssey. 

Ere he came hither. This confusion, then, 

Had never been. *T is for a beggar's sake s°° 

We wrangle, and the feast will henceforth give 

No pleasure ; we shall go fronv bad to worse." 

Then rose in majesty Telemachus, 
And said : " Ye are not in your senses sure, 
Unhappy men, who cannot eat and drink s°s 

In peace. Some deity, no doubt, has moved 
Your minds to frenzy. Now, when each of you 
Has feasted well, let each withdraw to sleep, 
Just when he will. I drive no man away." 

He spake ; the suitors heard, and bit their lips, s>° 

And wondered at Telemachus, who spake 
So resolutely. Then Amphinomus, 
The son of Nisus Aretiades, 
Stood forth, harangued the suitor crowd, and said : - — 

" O friends ! let no one here with carping words s»s 
Seek to deny what is so justly said, 
Nor yet molest the stranger, nor do harm 
To any of the servants in the halls 
Of the great chief Ulysses. Now let him 
Who brings the guests their wine begin and fill s*° 

The cups, that, pouring to the gods their part, 
We may withdraw to sleep. The stranger here 



Book xviii. 161 

Leave we within the palace, and in charge 
Of him to whom he came, Telemachus." 

He ended. All were pleased, and Mutlus then, 5*5 

Hero and herald from Dulichium's coast, 
And follower of the prince Amphinomus, 
Mingled a jar of wine, and went to each, 
Dispensing it. They to the blessed gods 
Poured first a part, and then they drank themselves 53° 
The generous juice. And when the wine was poured, 
And they had drunk what each desired, they went 
Homeward to slumber, each in his abode. 



VOL. II. 21 



BOOK XIX. 

\T OW was the godlike chief Ulysses left 

In his own palace, planning, with the aid 
Of Pallas, to destroy the suitor-train, 
And thus bespake his son with winged words : — 

" Now is the time, Telemachus, to take 5 

The weapons that are here, and store them up 
In the inner rooms. Then, if the suitors ask 
The reason, answer them with specious words : 
Say, ' I have put them where there comes no smoke, 
Since even now they do not seem the arms 10 

Left by Ulysses when he sailed for Troy, 
So tarnished are they by the breath of fire ; 
And yet another reason sways my mind, 
The prompting of some god, that ye, when flushed 
With wine and in the heat of a dispute, is 

May smite and wound each other, and disgrace 
The banquet and your wooing ; for the sight 
Of steel doth draw men on to violence.' " 



Book xix. 163 

He ended, and Telemachus obeyed 
His father's words, and calling forth his nurse, 20 

The aged Eurycleia, said to her : — 

" Go, nurse, and see the women all shut up 
In their own place, while in our inner room 
I lay away my father's beautiful arms, 
Neglected long, and sullied by the smoke, as 

While he was absent. I was then a child, 
But now would keep them from the breath of fire." 

And thus the nurse, Dame Eurycleia, said : 
" Would that at length, my child, thou didst exert 
Thy proper wisdom here, and take in charge 3° 

Thy house and thy possessions. But who goes 
With thee to bear a torch, since none of these, 
Thy handmaids, are allowed to light thy way ? " 

And thus discreet Telemachus replied : 
" This stranger. No man may be idle here 35 

Who eats my bread, though from a distant land." 

He spake, nor flew his words in vain. The nurse 
Closed all the portals of that noble pile. 
Ulysses and his glorious son in haste 
Bore off the helmets, and the bossy shields, 40 

And the sharp spears, while Pallas held to them 
A golden lamp, that shed a fair clear light. 



164 The Odyssey. 

Then to his father spake Telemachus : — 

" Father ! my eyes behold a marvel. All 
The palace walls, each beautiful recess, 45 

The fir-tree beams, the aspiring columns, shine, 
Before my eyes, as with a blaze of fire. 
Some god is surely here, some one of those 
Who make their dwelling in the high broad heaven." 

Ulysses, the sagacious, answered thus : 5° 

" Keep silence ; give thy thought no speech, nor ask 
Concerning aught. Such is the wont of those 
Who dwell upon Olympus. Now withdraw 
To rest upon thy couch, while I remain, 
For I would move thy mother and her maids 55 

To ask of what concerns me. She, I deem, 
Full sadly will inquire of many things." 

He spake; Telemachus departed thence, 
By torchlight, to his chamber, there to rest 
Where he was wont to lie when gentle sleep 60 

Came over him. There lay he down to wait 
The hallowed morning, while Ulysses, left 
Within the palace, meditated still 
Death to the suitors with Minerva's aid. 

The sage Penelope now left her bower ; 65 

Like Dian or like golden Venus came 



Book xix. 1 65 

The queen. Beside the hearth they placed for her 

The throne where she was wont to sit, inlaid 

With ivory and silver, which of yore 

The artisan Icmalius wrought. They laid 7° 

Close to the throne a footstool, over which 

Was spread an ample fleece. On this sat down 

The sage Penelope. Her white-armed train 

Of handmaids came with her ; they cleared away 

The abundant feast, and bore the tables off, 75 

And cups from which those insolent men had drunk ; 

They laid upon the ground the lighted brands, 

And heaped fresh fuel round them, both for light 

And warmth. And now Melantho once again 

Bespake Ulysses with unmannerly words : — r 8° 

" Stranger, wilt thou forever be a pest, 
Ranging the house at night to play the spy 
Upon the women ? Leave the hall, thou wretch ! 
And gorge thyself without, else wilt thou go 
Suddenly, driven by blows and flaming brands." 85 

The sage Ulysses frowned on her, and said : 
" Pert creature ! why so fiercely rail at me ? 
Is it that I am squalid and ill-clad, 
And forced by want to beg from hand to hand ? 
Such is the fate of poor and wandering men. 9° 



1 66 The Odyssey. 

I too was opulent once, inhabiting 

A plenteous home among my fellow-men, 

And often gave the wanderer alms, whoe'er 

He might be and in whatsoever need ; 

And I had many servants, and large store 95 

Of things by which men lead a life of ease 

And are called rich. But Jupiter, the son 

Of Saturn, put an end to this, for so 

It pleased the god. Now, therefore, woman, think 

That thou mayst lose the beauty which is now 100 

Thy pride among the serving-women here ; 

Thy mistress may be wroth, and make thy life 

A hard one ; or Ulysses may come back, — 

And there is hope of that. Or if it be 

That he has perished, and returns no more, 105 

There still remains his son Telemachus, 

Who by Apollo's grace is now a man, 

And no one of the women in these halls 

May think to misbehave, and yet escape 

His eye, for he no longer is a boy." no 

He spake ; Penelope, the prudent, heard, 
And, calling to her maid, rebuked her thus : — 

" O bold and shameless ! I have taken note 
Of thy behavior ; thou hast done a wrong 



Book xix. 167 

For which thy head should answer. Well thou know'st, 
For thou hast heard me say, that I would ask hg 

The stranger in these halls if aught he knows 
Of my Ulysses, for whose sake I grieve." 

Then to the matron of the household turned 
The queen, and thus bespake Eurynome : — 120 

" Bring now a seat, Eurynome, and spread 
A fleece upon it, where the stranger guest 
May sit at ease, and hear what I shall say, 
And answer me, for I have much to ask." 

She spake ; the ancient handmaid brought with speed 
A polished seat, and o'er it spread a fleece. i»6 

Ulysses, much enduring chief, sat down, 
And thus the sage Penelope began : — 

" First will I ask thee who thou art, and whence, 
Where is thy birthplace, and thy parents who ? " «3° 

Ulysses, the sagacious, answered thus : 
"O lady, none in all the boundless earth 
Can speak of thee with blame. Thy fame has reached 
To the great heavens. It is like the renown 
Of some most excellent king, of godlike sway «35 

O'er many men and mighty, who upholds 
Justice in all his realm. The dark-soiled earth 
Brings wheat and barley forth ; the trees are bowed 



1 68 The Odyssey. 

With fruit ; the meadows swarm with noble herds, 

The sea with fish, and under his wise reign '4° 

The people prosper. Therefore ask, I pray, 

Of other things, while I am underneath 

Thy palace-roof, but of my race and home 

Inquire not, lest thou waken in my mind 

Unhappy memories. I am a man 14s 

Of sorrow, and it would become me ill 

To sit lamenting in another's house 

And shedding tears. Besides, a grief indulged 

Doth grow in violence. Thy maids would blame, 

And thou perhaps, and ye would call my tears 150 

The maudlin tears of one o'ercome with wine." 

Then spake the sage Penelope again : 
" Stranger, such grace of feature and of form 
As once I had the immortals took away, 
What time the Argive warriors sailed for Troy, 155 

And my Ulysses with them. Could he now 
Return to rule my household as of yore, 
The wider and the brighter were my fame. 
But now I lead a wretched life, so great 
And many are the evils which some god 160 

Heaps on me. For the chieftains who bear sway 
Over the isles — Dulichium, and the fields 



Book xix. 169 

Of Samos, and Zacynthus dark with woods, 

And those who rule in sunny Ithaca — 

Woo me against my will, and waste away 165 

My substance. Therefore have I small regard 

For strangers and for suppliants, and the tribe 

Of heralds, servants of the public weal, 

But, pining for Ulysses, wear away 

My life. The suitors urge the marriage rite, 17° 

And I with art delay it. Once some god 

Prompted me to begin an ample web, 

Wide and of subtle texture, in my rooms. 

And then I said : ' Youths, who are pressing me 

To marriage, since Ulysses is no more, 175 

Urge me no further till I shall complete — 

That so the threads may not be spun in vain — 

This shroud for old Laertes, when grim fate 

And death's long sleep at last shall overtake 

The hero ; else among the multitude 18° 

Of Grecian women I shall bear the blame, 

If one whose ample wealth so well was known 

Should lie in death without a funeral robe.' 

I spake, and easily their minds were swayed 

By what I said, and I began to weave 185 

The ample web, but ravelled it again 



1 70 The Odyssey. 

By torchlight every evening. For three years 

I foiled them thus ; but when the fourth year came, 

And brought its train of hours and changing moons, 

And many days had passed, they came on me, 19° 

And through my maidens' fault, a careless crew, 

They caught me at my fraud, and chid me sore. 

So, though unwilling, I was forced to end 

My task, and cannot longer now escape 

The marriage, nor is any refuge left. 195 

My parents both exhort me earnestly 

To choose a husband, and my son with grief 

Beholds the suitors wasting his estate, 

And he already is a man and well 

Can rule his household ; Jupiter bestows aoo 

Such honor on him. Now, I pray, declare 

Thy lineage, for thou surely art not sprung 

From the old fabulous oak, nor from a rock." 

Ulysses, the sagacious, answered her : 
" O royal consort of Laertes' son ! 205 

Wilt thou still ask my lineage ? I will then 
Disclose it, but thou wakest in my heart 
New sorrows. So it ever is with one 
Who long, like me, is far away from home, 
Wandering in many realms, and suffering much ; *io 



Book xix. 171 

But since thou dost require it, thou shalt hear. 

" Crete is a region lying in the midst 
Of the black deep, a fair and fruitful land, 
Girt by the waters. Many are the men, 
Nay, numberless, who make it their abode, *>5 

And ninety are its cities. Different tongues 
Are spoken by the dwellers of the isle. 
In part they are Achaians, and in part 
Are Cretans of the soil, a gallant stock ; 
There dwell Cydonians, Dorians of three tribes, 2*0 

And proud Pelasgians. Their great capital 
Is Cnossus, where the monarch Minos dwelt, 
He who at every nine years' end conferred 
With Jove almighty ; and to him was born 
Deucalion, my brave father, who begat *»s 

Me and Idomeneus, the King of Crete. 
To Ilium in his beaked galleys sailed 
Idomeneus with Atreus' sons. My name — 
A name well known — is Mthon. "V was at Crete 
I saw Ulysses, who received from me 23° 

The welcome due a guest. A violent wind 
Had driven him from Maleia and the course 
That led to Ilium, and had carried him 
To Crete, and lodged him in the dangerous port 



i/ 2 The Odyssey. 

Amnisus, close to Ilithyia's cave, 235 

Where scarce his fleet escaped the hurricane. 

Thence came he to the city, and inquired 

For King Idomeneus, who was, he said, 

His dear and honored guest ; but he had sailed 

Ten days before, perhaps eleven, for Troy, 240 

In his beaked galleys. To the palace there 

I led Ulysses, and with liberal cheer 

Welcomed the chief, for plentifully stored 

The royal dwelling was. I also gave 

Meal from the public magazines to him 245 

And those who followed him, and dark red wine 

Brought from the country round, and beeves to slay 

In sacrifice, that so their hearts might feel 

No lack of aught. Twelve days the noble Greeks 

Remained with us. A violent north-wind, 25° 

Which scarcely suffered them to stand upright 

On shore, withstood them. Some unfriendly power 

Had bid it blow ; but on the thirteenth day 

Its fury ceased, and the fleet put to sea." 

Thus went he on, inventing tales that seemed 255 

Like truth. She listened, melting into tears 
That flowed as when on mountain height the snow, 
Shed by the west-wind, feels the east^-wind's breath, 



Book xix. 173 

And flows in water, and the hurrying streams 

Are filled ; so did Penelope's fair cheeks 260 

Seem to dissolve in tears, — tears shed for him 

Who sat beside her even then. He saw 

His weeping wife, and pitied her at heart ; 

Yet were his eyes like iron or like horn, 

And moved not in their lids ; for artfully i6 S 

He kept his tears from falling. When the queen 

Had ceased to weep, she answered him and said : — 

"Now, stranger, let me prove thee, if in truth 
Thou didst receive, as thou hast just declared, 
In thine abode, my husband and his train 17° 

Of noble friends. Describe the garb he wore ; 
How looked he, and the friends he brought with him ? " 

Ulysses, the sagacious, answered her : 
" O lady, hard it is to answer thee, 

So long have I been far away from home. 375 

'T is now the twentieth year since he was there 
And left the isle, but, as my memory bids, 
So will I speak. A fleecy purple cloak 
Ulysses wore, a double web ; the clasp 
Was golden, with two fastenings, and in front 28° 

It showed a work of rare design, — a hound 
That held in his fore-paws a spotted fawn, 



174 The Odyssey. 

Struggling before his open mouth. Although 

The figures were of gold, we all admired 

The hound intent to break his victim's neck, *s 5 

The fawn that, writhing, plied her nimble feet 

To free herself. Around the hero's chest 

And waist I saw a lustrous tunic worn, 

Soft, like the thin film of the onion dried, 

And bright as sunshine ; many ladies looked *9° 

With wonder on it. Yet consider this ; 

I know not whether thus attired he left 

His home, or whether, in the voyage thence, 

Some comrade gave the garments, or perhaps 

Some friendly host, for he was very dear 295 

To many ; among the Greeks were few like him. 

I gave him, from myself, a brazen sword, 

And a fair purple cloak, a double web, 

Besides a tunic reaching to his feet, 

And with due honors sent him on his way 3°° 

In his good ship. There came and went with him 

A herald somewhat older than himself; 

Let me portray him, — hunchbacked, swarthy skinned, 

And curly haired, Eurybates his name. 

Ulysses honored him above the rest 305 

Of his companions, for they thought alike." 



Book xix. 175 

He ceased ; the queen was moved to deeper grief, 
For she remembered all the tokens well 
Of which he spake ; and when that passionate gust 
Of weeping ceased, she spake again and said : — 3*° 

" Stranger, till now thy presence in these halls 
Has only moved my pity ; thou henceforth 
Art dear and honored. It was I who gave 
The garments thou hast told me of; these hands 
Folded them in my chamber. I put on 315 

The glittering clasp to be his ornament, 
And now I never shall behold him more 
Returning to his own dear land and home ; 
So cruel was the fate that took him hence 
To Ilium, in his roomy ship, a town 3*0 

Of evil omen never to be named." 

Ulysses, the sagacious, answered thus : 
" O gracious consort of Laertes' son ! 
Let not thy grief for him whom thou hast lost 
Wither thy beauty longer, and consume 3*5 

Thy heart. And yet I blame thee not at all ; 
For any wife in losing him to whom 
She gave herself while yet a maid, and bore 
Children, will mourn him, though he be in worth 
Below Ulysses, who, as fame declares, 33° 



1 76 The Odyssey. 

Is like the gods. But cease to grieve, and hear 

What I shall say, and I shall speak the truth, 

Nor will I hide from thee that I have heard, 

But lately from Ulysses, yet alive, 

And journeying homeward, in the opulent realm 335 

Of the Thesprotians, whence he brings with him 

Much and rare treasure, gathered there among 

The people. His beloved friends he lost, 

And his good ship ; the black deep swallowed them 

In coming from Trinacria, for his crew 340 

Had slaughtered there the oxen of the Sun. 

The Sun and Jove were angry ; therefore all 

His comrades perished in the billowy sea ; 

But him upon his galley's keel the wind 

Drove to the coast where the Phceacians dwell, 345 

The kinsmen of the gods. They welcomed him, 

And honored him as if he were a god, 

And gave him many things, and would have sent 

The hero safely to his native isle ; 

And here Ulysses would have been long since, 35° 

But that he deemed it wise to travel far, 

And gather wealth, — for well Ulysses knew, 

Beyond all other men, the arts of gain, 

And none in these could think to rival him ; 



Book xix. 177 

So Pheidon, king of the Thesprotians said, 35s 

Who also, in his palace, swore to me — 

As to the gods of heaven he poured the wine — 

That even then a galley was drawn down 

Into the water, and already manned 

With rowers, who should take Ulysses home. 36° 

But me he first dismissed, for at the time 

A bark of the Thesprotians left the port, 

Bound for Dulichium's cornfields. Ere I went 

He showed the treasures of Ulysses stored 

In the king's palace, — treasures that might serve 36s 

To feed the household of another chief 

To the tenth generation. He who owned 

That wealth was at Dodona, so the king 

Declared, inquiring, at the lofty oak 

Of Jupiter, the counsel of the god 370 

How to return to his dear native land, 

So long a wanderer, — whether openly 

Or else by stealth. So he is safe, and soon 

Will he be nearer to us ; for not long 

Can he remain away from all his friends 37s 

And fatherland. To this I plight my oath ; 

Let Jove, the greatest and the best of gods, 

Be witness, and this hearth of the good prince 

VOL. II. 23 



178 The Odyssey. 

Ulysses, where I sit, that every word 

Which I have said to thee will be fulfilled. 380 

Within the year Ulysses will return, 

As this month passes and the next comes in." 

Then spake the sage Penelope again : 
" Would that it might be thus, O stranger guest, 
As thou hast said ; then shouldst thou have such thanks 
And bounty at my hands that every one 386 

Who meets thee should rejoice with thee. And yet 
The thought abides with me, and so indeed 
It must be, that Ulysses will no more 
Return, nor wilt thou find an escort hence; 39° 

For now no master like Ulysses rules — 
And what a man was he ! — within these walls, 
To welcome or dismiss the honored guest. 
But now, ye maidens, let the stranger bathe, 
And spread his couch with blankets, fleecy cloaks, 395 

And showy tapestries, that he may lie 
Warm till the Morning, in her golden car, 
Draw near ; then with the early morn again 
Bathe and anoint him, that he may sit down 
Beside Telemachus prepared to take 4°° 

His morning meal. Ill shall he fare who dares 
Molest the stranger ; he shall have no place 



Book xix. 179 

Or office here, however he may rage. 

And how, O stranger, wouldst thou learn that I 

In mind and thoughtful wisdom am above 405 

All other women, if I let thee sit 

Squalid and meanly clad at banquets here ? 

Short is the life of man, and whoso bears 

A cruel heart, devising cruel things, 

On him men call down evil from the gods 410 

While living, and pursue him, when he dies, 

With scoffs. But whoso is of generous heart 

And harbors generous aims, his guests proclaim 

His praises far and wide to all mankind, 

And numberless are they who call him good." 41s 

Ulysses, the sagacious, answered thus : 
" O gracious consort of Laertes' son ! 
Such cloaks and splendid coverings please me not, 
Since in my long-oared bark I left behind 
The snowy peaks of Crete. I still will lie, 4*° 

As I am wont through many a sleepless night, 
On a mean couch to wait the holy Morn 
Upon her car of gold. I do not like 
This washing of the feet. No maiden here 
That ministers to thee may touch my foot ; 425 

But if among them be some aged dame 



180 The Odyssey. 

And faithful, who has suffered in hen life 
As I have suffered, she may touch my feet." 

And thus the sage Penelope rejoined : 
" Dear guest, — for never to these halls has come 43° 

A stranger so discreet or better liked 
By me, so wisely thou dost speak, and well, — 
I have an aged prudent dame, whose care 
Reared my unfortunate husband. She received 
The nursling when his mother brought him forth, 43s 

And she, though small her strength, will wash thy feet. 
Rise, prudent Eurycleia, thou shalt wash 
The feet of one whose years must be the same 
As thy own master's ; such is doubtless now 
Ulysses, with such wrinkled feet and hands. 44° 

For quickly doth misfortune make men old." 

She spake ; the aged handmaid hid her face 
With both her hands, and, shedding bitter tears, 
Thus sorrowfully to the queen replied : — 

" My heart is sad for thee, my son ; and yet 44s 

I can do nothing. Can it be that Jove 
Hates thee beyond all other ? though thyself 
So reverent to the gods ? No man on earth 
Has burned so many thighs of fading beasts 
And chosen hecatombs as thou to Jove 45° 



Book xix. 181 

The Thunderer, with prayer that thou mayst reach 

A calm old age, and rear thy glorious son 

To manhood ; yet the god hath cut thee off 

From thy return forever. Even now 

Perchance the women of some princely house 4-55 

Which he has entered in some distant land 

Scoff at him as these wretched creatures scoff 

At thee, O stranger, who, to shun their taunts 

And insults, wilt not suffer them to wash 

Thy feet. The sage Penelope commands, 460 

And I am not unwilling. I will wash 

Thy feet, both for her sake and for thy own ; 

For deeply am I moved at sight of thee. 

Hear what I say : of strangers in distress 

Come many hither, yet have I beheld 465 

No one who bears, in shape and voice and feet, 

Such likeness to our absent lord as thou." 

Ulysses, the sagacious, thus replied : 
" O aged woman, so has it been said 
By all who have beheld both him and me. 470 

They all declare that we are very like 
Each other ; thou in this hast spoken well." 

He spake ; she took a shining vase designed 
For washing feet, and poured cold water in 



1 82 The Odyssey. 

In large abundance, and warm water next. +7* 

Ulysses, who had sat before the hearth, 

Moved to a darker spot, for in his mind 

The thought arose that she might find a scar 

Upon his limbs in handling them, and thus 

His secret would be known. She came and bathed 480 

His feet, and found the scar. 'T was where a boar 

With his white tooth had gashed the limb, as once 

He journeyed to Parnassus, where he paid 

A visit to Autolycus and his sons, 

His mother's noble father, who excelled 485 

All men in craft and oaths, such was the gift 

Conferred on him by Hermes; for to him 

Autolycus made grateful offerings, 

The thighs of lambs and kids, and evermore 

The god was with him. Once Autolycus 490 

Came to the opulent realm of Ithaca, 

And found his daughter with a son new born ; 

There Eurycleia placed upon his knees 

The infant, just as he had supped, and said : — 

" Give this dear babe, Autolycus, a name, — 495 

Thy daughter's son, vouchsafed to many prayers." 

And thus Autolycus in answer spake : 
" Daughter and son-in-law, be his the name 



Book xix. 183 

That I shall give. In coming to this isle 

I bear the hate of many — both of men 5°° 

And women — scattered o'er the nourishing earth ; 

Name him Ulysses therefore, and when, grown 

To man's estate, he visits the proud halls 

Reared at Parnassus, where his mother dwelt 

And my possessions lie, I will bestow 5°5 

A share on him, and send him home rejoiced." 

And therefore went Ulysses to receive 
The promised princely gifts. Autolycus 
And all his sons received him with kind words, 
And friendly grasp of hands. Amphithea there — 51° 
His mother's mother — took him in her arms, 
And kissed his brow and both his beautiful eyes. 
Then to his noble sons Autolycus 
Called to prepare a feast, and they obeyed. 
They brought and slew a steer of five years old, s*s 

And flayed and dressed it, hewed the joints apart, 
And sliced the flesh, and fixed it upon spits, 
Roasted it carefully, and gave to each 
His part. So all the day till set of sun 
They feasted, to the full content of all. 5-° 

And when the sun had set, and earth grew dark, 
They laid them down, and took the gift of sleep. 



184 The Odyssey. 

But when the rosy-fingered Morn appeared, 

Born of the Dawn, forth issued the young men, 

The children of Autolycus, with hounds, s*s 

To hunt, attended by their noble guest, 

Ulysses. Up the steeps of that high mount 

Parnassus, clothed with woods, they climbed, and soon 

Were on its airy heights. The sun, new risen . 

From the deep ocean's gently flowing stream, 530 

Now smote the fields. The hunters reached a dell ; 

The hounds before them tracked the game ; behind 

Followed the children of Autolycus. 

The generous youth Ulysses, brandishing 

A spear of mighty length, came pressing on 535 

Close to the hounds. There lay a huge wild boar 

Within a thicket, where moist-blowing winds 

Came not, nor in his brightness could the sun 

Pierce with his beams the covert, nor the rain 

Pelt through, so closely grew the shrubs. The ground 54° 

Was heaped with sheddings of the withered leaves. 

Around him came the noise of dogs and men 

Approaching swiftly. From his lair he sprang 

And faced them, with the bristles on his neck 

Upright, and flashing eyes. Ulysses rushed 545 

Before the others, with the ponderous spear 



Book xix. 185 

Raised high in his strong hand intent to smite. 

The boar was first to strike ; he dealt a blow 

Sidelong, and gashed his foe above the knee, 

And tore the flesh, but left untouched the bone. 55° 

Ulysses, striking with his burnished spear 

The boar's right shoulder, drove the weapon through. 

He fell with piercing cries amid the dust, 

And the life left him. Then around their guest 

The kindly children of Autolycus 555 

Came and bound up with care the wound, and stanched 

With spells the dark blood of the blameless youth. 

And hastened with him to their father's home. 

And when Autolycus and they his sons 

Had seen him wholly healed, they loaded him 56° 

With presents, and, rejoicing for his sake, 

Sent him rejoicing back to Ithaca. 

His father and his gracious mother there 

Rejoiced in turn, and asked him of the scar. 

And how it came, and he related all, — 565 

How by the white tusk of a savage boar 

The wound was given on the Parnassian heights, 

As he was hunting with her father's sons." 

The aged woman, as she took the foot 
Into her hands, perceived by touch the scar, 570 

VOL. II. Z4 



1 86 The Odyssey. 

And, letting fall the limb, it struck the vase. 

Loud rang the brass, the vase was overturned, 

And poured the water forth. At once a rush 

Of gladness and of grief came o'er her heart. 

Tears filled her eyes, and her clear voice was choked. 575 

She touched Ulysses on the chin, and said : — 

" Dear child ! thou art Ulysses, of a truth. 
I knew thee not till I had touched the scar." 

So speaking, toward Penelope she turned 
Her eyes, about to tell her that her lord 580 

Was in the palace ; but the queen saw not, 
And all that passed was unperceived by her, 
For Pallas turned her thoughts another way. 
Meantime, Ulysses on the nurse's throat 
Laid his right hand, and with the other drew 585 

The aged woman nearer him, and said : — 

" Nurse, wouldst thou ruin me, who drew long since 
Milk from thy bosom, and who now return, 
After much suffering borne for twenty years, 
To mine own land ? Now then, since thou hast learned 
The truth, — by prompting of some god, no doubt, — 591 
Keep silence, lest some others in the house 
Should learn it also. Else, — I tell thee this, 
And will perform my word, — if God permit 



Book xix. 187 

That I o'ercome the arrogant suitor-crew, 595 

Nurse as thou art, I spare not even thee, 
When in these halls the other maidens die." 

Then thus the prudent Eurycleia said : 
" What words, my son, have passed thy lips ? for well 
Thou knowest my firm mind ; it never yields, 600 

Like solid rock or steel I keep my trust. 
This let me tell thee, and, I pray thee, keep 
My words in mind. If, by the aid of God, 
Thou overcome the arrogant suitor-crew, 
Then will I name the handmaids that disgrace 605 

Thy household, and point out the innocent." 

Ulysses, the sagacious, thus rejoined : 
" Why name them, nurse ? It needs not. I myself 
Shall watch them, and shall know them all. Hold thou 
Thy peace, and leave the issue with the gods." 6i<? 

He spake ; the aged woman left the place 
To bring a second bath, for on the floor 
The first was spilled. When she had bathed his feet 
And made them smooth with oil, Ulysses drew 
Close to the hearth his seat again, to take 615 

The warmth, and with his tatters hid the scar. 
And thus the sage Penelope began : — 

" Stranger, but little longer will I yet 



1 88 The Odyssey. 

Inquire ; the hour of grateful rest is near 

For those who, though unhappy, can receive 620 

The balm of slumber. Yet for me some god 

Appoints immeasurable grief. All day 

In sorrow and in sighs, my solace is 

To oversee my maidens at their tasks 

Here in the palace ; but when evening comes, 625 

And all betake themselves to rest, I lie 

Upon my couch, and sorrows thick and sharp 

Awake new misery in my heart. As when, 

In the fresh spring, the swarthy Nightingale, 

Daughter of Pandarus, among thick leaves 630 

Sings sweetly to the woods, and, changing oft 

The strain, pours forth her voice of many notes, 

Lamenting the beloved Itylus, \ 

Her son by royal Zethos, whom she smote 

Unwittingly, and slew ; with such quick change 635 

My mind is tossed from thought to thought. I muse 

Whether to keep my place beside my son, 

And hold what here is mine, my dower, my maids 

And high-roofed halls, as one who still reveres 

Her husband's bed, and heeds the public voice, 64.0 

Or follow one of the Achaian chiefs, 

The noblest of the wooers, and the one 



Book xix. 189 

Who offers marriage presents without stint. 
My son's green years, while he was yet a boy, 
Unripe in mind, allowed me not to wed, 645 

And leave his father's home ; but he is grown, 
And on the verge of manhood. He desires 
That I should leave the palace, for his wrath 
Is great against the men who waste his wealth. 
Hear, and interpret now a dream of mine : 65° 

Within these courts are twenty geese that eat 
Corn from the water, and I look on them 
Pleased and amused. From off a mountain came 
A hook-beaked eagle, broke their necks, and left 
Their bodies strewn about the palace dead, 655 

And soared again into the air of heaven. 
I wept and moaned, although it was a dream ; 
And round me came the fair-haired Grecian maids, 
Lamenting wildly that the bird of prey 
Had slain my geese. Then came the eagle back, 660 

And took his perch upon the jutting roof, 
And thus bespake me in a human voice : — 
" * O daughter of Icarius, the renowned ! 
Let not thy heart be troubled ; this is not 
A dream, but a true vision, and will be 665 

Fulfilled. The geese denote the suitor-train, 



190 The Odyssey, 

And I, who was an eagle once, am come, 
Thy husband, now to end them utterly.' 

" He spake ; my slumbers left me, and I looked, 
And saw the geese that in the palace still 670 

Were at their trough, and feeding as before." 

And thus Ulysses, the sagacious, said : 
" Lady, the dream that visited thy sleep 
Cannot be wrested to another sense. 

Ulysses has himself revealed to thee 675 

The way of its fulfilment. Death is near 
The suitors, and not one escapes his doom." 

Then spake the sage Penelope again : 
" Of dreams, O stranger, some are meaningless 
And idle, and can never be fulfilled. 680 

Two portals are there for their shadowy shapes, 
Of ivory one, and one of horn. The dreams 
That come through the carved ivory deceive 
With promises that never are made good ; 
But those which pass the doors of polished horn, 685 

And are beheld of men, are ever true. 
And yet I cannot hope that my strange dream 
Came through them, though my son and I would both 
Rejoice if it were so. This let me say, 
And heed me well. To-morrow brings to us 690 



Book xix. 191 

The hateful morn which takes me from my home, 

The palace of Ulysses. I shall now 

Propose a contest. In the palace court 

Ulysses in a row set up twelve stakes, 

Like props that hold a galley up ; each stake 695 

Had its own ring ; he stood afar, and sent 

An arrow through them all. I shall propose 

This contest to the suitors. He who bends 

The bow with easy mastery, and sends 

Through the twelve rings an arrow, I will take 7°° 

To follow from the palace where I passed 

My youthful married life, — a beautiful home, 

And stored with wealth ; a home which I shall long 

Remember, even in my nightly dreams." 

Ulysses, the sagacious, answered thus : 7°s 

" O gracious consort of Laertes' son ! 
Let not this contest be delayed ; the man 
Of ready wiles, Ulysses, will be here 
Ere, tampering with the hero's polished bow, 
The suitors shall prevail to stretch the cord, 71° 

And send an arrow through the rings of steel." 

And thus the sage Penelope rejoined : — 
" Stranger, if, sitting in the palace here, 
Thou still wouldst entertain me as thou dost, 



192 The Odyssey. 

Sleep would not fall upon my lids ; and yet 715 

Sleepless the race of mortals cannot be, 

So have the gods ordained, who measure out 

His lot to man upon the nourishing earth. 

I to the upper rooms withdraw, to take 

My place upon the couch which has become 7*° 

To me a place of sorrow and of tears 

Since my Ulysses went away to Troy, • 

That fatal town which should be named no more. 

And I will lay me down ; but thou remain 

Within these walls, and make the floor thy bed, 7*5 

Or let these maidens spread a couch for thee." 

Penelope, thus having spoken, went 
Up to her royal bower, but not alone ; 
Her maids went with her. When they were within 
She wept for her dear husband, till at length 73° 

The hlue-eyed Pallas graciously distilled 
Upon her closing lids the balm of sleep. 



BOOK XX. 

HP HE noble chief, Ulysses, in the porch 

Lay down to rest. An undressed bullock's hide 
Was under him, and over that the skins 
Of sheep, which for the daily sacrifice 
The Achaians slew. Eurynome had spread 5 

A cloak above him. There he lay awake, 
And meditated how he yet should smite 
The suitors down. Meantime, with cries of mirth 
And laughter, came the women forth to seek 
The suitors' arms. Ulysses, inly moved «° 

With anger, pondered whether he should rise 
And put them all to death, or give their shame 
A respite for another night, the last. 
His heart raged in his bosom. As a hound 
Growls, walking round her whelps, when she beholds 15 
A stranger, and is eager for the attack, 
So growled his heart within him, and so fierce 

Was his impatience with that shameless crew. 
vol. 11. 25 



194 The Odyssey. 

He smote his breast, and thus he chid his heart : — 

" Endure it, heart ! thou didst bear worse than this. *o 
When the grim Cyclops of resistless strength 
Devoured thy brave companions, thou couldst still 
Endure, till thou by stratagem didst leave 
The cave in which it seemed that thou must die." 

Thus he rebuked his heart, and, growing calm, *s 

His heart submitted ; but the hero tossed 
From side to side. As when one turns and turns 
The stomach of a bullock filled with fat 
And blood before a fiercely blazing fire 
And wishes it were done, so did the chief 3° 

Shift oft from side to side, while pondering how 
To lay a strong hand on the multitude 
Of shameless suitors, — he but one, and they 
So many. Meantime Pallas, sliding down 
From heaven, in form a woman, came, and there 35 

Beside his bed stood over him, and spake : — 

" Why, most unhappy of the sons of men, 
Art thou still sleepless ? This is thine abode, 
And here thou hast thy consort and a son 
Whom any man might covet for his own." 4° 

Ulysses, the sagacious, answered thus : 
" Truly, O goddess, all that thou hast said 



Book xx. 195 

Is rightly spoken. This perplexes me, — 

How to lay hands upon these shameless men, 

When I am only one, and they a throng 45 

That fill the palace. Yet another thought, 

And mightier still, — if, by thy aid and Jove's, 

I slay the suitors, how shall I myself 

Be safe thereafter ? Think, I pray, of this." 

And thus in turn the blue-eyed Pallas said : $=> 

" O faint of spirit ! in an humbler friend 
Than I am, in a friend of mortal birth 
And less far-seeing, one might put his trust ; 
But I am born a goddess, and protect 
Thy life in every danger. Let me say, 55 

And plainly say, if fifty armed bands 
Of men should gather round us, eager all 
To take thy life, thou mightest drive away, 
Unharmed by them, their herds and pampered flocks. 
But give thyself to sleep. To wake and watch 60 

All night is most unwholesome. Thou shalt find 
A happy issue from thy troubles yet." 

She spake, and, shedding slumber on his lids, 
Upward the glorious goddess took her way 
Back to Olympus, when she saw that sleep 65 

Had seized him, making him forget all care 



196 The Odyssey. 

And slackening every limb. Plis faithful wife 

Was still awake, and sat upright and wept 

On her soft couch, and after many tears 

The glorious lady prayed to Dian thus : — 7° 

" Goddess august ! Diana, child of Jove ! 
I would that thou wouldst send into my heart 
A shaft to take my life, or that a storm 
Would seize and hurl me through the paths of air, 
And cast me into ocean's restless streams, 75 

As once a storm, descending, swept away 
The daughters born to Pandarus. The gods 
Had slain their parents, and they dwelt alone 
As orphans in their palace, nourished there 
By blessed Venus with the curds of milk, 80 

And honey, and sweet wine, while Juno gave 
Beauty and wit beyond all womankind, 
And chaste Diana dignity of form, 
And Pallas every art that graces life. 
Then, as the blessed Venus went to ask 85 

For them, of Jove the Thunderer, on the heights 
Of his Olympian mount, the crowning gift 
Of happy marriage, — for to Jove is known 
Whatever comes to pass, and what shall be 
The fortune, good or ill, of mortal men, — 90 



Book xx. 197 

The Harpies came meantime, bore off the maids, 

And gave them to the hateful sisterhood 

Of Furies as their servants. So may those 

Who dwell upon Olympus make an end 

Of me, or fair-haired Dian strike me down, 95 

That, with the image of Ulysses still 

Before my mind, I may not seek to please 

One of less worth. This evil might be borne 

By one who weeps all day, and feels at heart 

A settled sorrow, yet can sleep at night. ,100 

For sleep, when once it weighs the eyelids down, 

Makes men unmindful both of good and ill, 

And all things else. But me some deity 

Visits with fearful dreams. There lay by me, 

This very night, one like him, as he was «°s 

When with his armed men he sailed for Troy ; 

And I was glad, for certainly I deemed 

It was a real presence, and no dream." 

She spake. Just then, upon her car of gold, 
Appeared the Morn. The great Ulysses heard "° 

That voice of lamentation ; anxiously 
He mused ; it seemed to him as if the queen 
Stood over him and knew him. Gathering up 
In haste the cloak and skins on which he slept, 



198 The Odyssey. 

He laid them in the palace on a seat, »s 

But bore the bull's hide forth in open air, 
And lifted up his hands and prayed to Jove : — 

" O Father Jove, and all the gods ! if ye 
Have led me graciously, o'er land and deep, 
Across the earth, and, after suffering much, no 

To mine own isle, let one of those who watch 
Within the palace speak some ominous word, 
And grant a sign from thee without these walls." 

So prayed he. All-providing Jupiter 
Hearkened, and thundered from the clouds around 125 
The bright Olympian peaks. Ulysses heard 
With gladness. From a room within the house, 
In which the mills of the king's household stood, 
A woman, laboring at the quern, gave forth 
An omen also. There were twelve who toiled 13° 

In making flour of barley and of wheat, — 
The strength of man. The rest were all asleep ; 
Their tasks were done ; one only, of less strength 
Than any other there, kept toiling on. 
She paused a moment, stopped the whirling stone, 135 

And spake these words, — a portent for the king : — 

" O Father Jove, the king of gods and men ! 
Thou hast just thundered from the starry heaven, 



Book xx. 199 

And yet there is no cloud. To some one here 

It is a portent. O perform for me, 140 

All helpless as I am, this one request ! 

Let now the suitors in this palace take 

Their last and final pleasant feast to-day, — 

These men who make my limbs, with constant toil, 

In grinding corn for them, to lose their strength, 14s 

Once let them banquet here, and then no more." 

She spake ; the omen of the woman's words 
And Jove's loud thunder pleased Ulysses well ; 
And now he deemed he should avenge himself 
Upon the guilty ones. The other maids 15° 

Of that fair palace of Ulysses woke 
And came together, and upon the hearth 
Kindled a steady fire. Telemachus 
Rose from his bed in presence like a god, 
Put on his garments, hung his trenchant sword 155 

Upon his shoulder, tied to his fair feet 
The shapely sandals, took his massive spear 
Tipped with sharp brass, and, stopping as he reached 
The threshold, spake to Eurycleia thus : — 

" Dear nurse, have ye with honor fed and lodged 160 
Our guest, or have ye suffered him to find 
A lodging where he might, without your care ? 



200 The Odyssey. 

Discerning as she is, my mother pays 

High honor to the worse among her guests, 

And sends the nobler man unhonored hence." 165 

And thus the prudent Eurycleia said : 
" My child, blame not thy mother ; she deserves 
No blame. The stranger sat and drank his wine, 
All that he would, and said, when pressed to eat, 
That he desired no more. And when he thought 170 

Of sleep, she bade her maidens spread his couch ; 
But he refused a bed and rugs, like one 
Inured to misery, and beneath the porch 
Slept on an undressed bull's hide and the skins 
Of sheep, and over him we cast a cloak." 17s 

She spake ; Telemachus, his spear in hand, 
Went forth, his fleet dogs following him. He sought 
The council where the well-greaved Greeks were met. 
Meantime the noble Eurycleia, child 
Of Ops, Pisenor's son, bespake the maids : — i«° 

" Come, some of you, at once, and sweep the floor, 
And sprinkle it, and on the shapely thrones 
Spread coverings of purple tapestry ; 
Let others wipe the tables with a sponge, 
And cleanse the beakers and the double cups, 1*5 

While others go for water to the fount, 



Book xx. 20 1 

And bring it quickly, for not long to-day 
The suitors will be absent from these halls. 
They will come early to the general feast." 

She spake ; the handmaids hearkened and obeyed, 19° 
And twenty went to the dark well to draw 
The water, while the others busily 
Bestirred themselves about the house. Then came 
The servants of the chiefs, and set themselves 
Neatly to cleave the wood. Then also came 19s 

The women from the well. The swineherd last 
Came with three swine, the fattest of the herd. 
In that fair court he let them feed, and sought 
Ulysses, greeting him with courteous words : — 

" Hast thou, O stranger, found among these Greeks 200 
More reverence ? Art thou still their mark of scorn ? " 

Ulysses, the sagacious, answered thus : 
" O that the gods, Eumaeus, would avenge 
The insolence of those who meditate 
Violent deeds, and make another's house 205 

Their plotting-place, and feel no touch of shame ! " 

So talked they with each other. Now appeared 
Melanthius, keeper of the goats. He brought 
Goats for the suitors' banquet ; they were choice 
Beyond all others. With him also came «° 

VOL. II. 26 



202 The Odyssey. 

Two goatherds. In the echoing portico 
He bound his goats. He saw Ulysses there, 
And thus accosted him with railing words : — 

" Stranger, art thou still here, the palace pest, 
And begging still, and wilt thou ne'er depart ? «s 

We shall not end this quarrel, I perceive, 
Till thou hast tried the flavor of my fist. 
It is not decent to be begging here 
Continually ; the Greeks have other feasts." 

He spake ; Ulysses answered not, but shook «° 

His head in silence, planning fearful things. 

Philoetius now, a master-herdsman, came, 
And for the banquet of the suitors led 
A heifer that had never yeaned, and goats 
The fatlings of the flock ; they came across «s 

The ferry, brought by those whose office is 
To bear whoever comes from shore to shore. 
He bound his animals in the sounding porch, 
And went and, standing by the swineherd, said : — 

" Who, swineherd, is the stranger newly come n° 

To this our palace ? of what parents born, 
And of what race, and where his native land ? 
Unhappy seemingly, yet like a king 
In person. Sorrowful must be the lot 



Book xx. 203 

Of men who wander to and fro on earth, 135 

When even to kings the gods appoint distress." 

He spake, and, greeting with his offered hand 
Ulysses, said in winged words aloud : — 

" Stranger and father, hail ! and mayst thou yet 
Be happy in the years to come at least, *4° 

Though held in thrall by many sorrows now. 
Yet thou, All-father Jove ! art most austere 
Of all the gods, not sparing even those 
Who have their birth from thee, but bringing them 
To grief and pain. The sweat is on my brow *45 

When I behold this stranger, and my eyes 
Are filled with tears when to my mind comes back 
The image of Ulysses, who must now, 
I think, be wandering, clothed in rags like thee, 
Among the abodes of men, if yet indeed *s° 

He lives and sees the sweet light of the sun. 
But if that he be dead, and in the abode 
Of Pluto, woe is me for his dear sake ! 
The blameless chief, who when I was a boy 
Gave to me, in the Cephalenian fields, 25s 

The charge of all his beeves ; and they are now 
Innumerable ; the broad-fronted race 
Of cattle never would have multiplied 



204 The Odyssey. 

So largely under other care than mine. 

Now other masters bid me bring my beeves *6o 

For their own feasts. They little heed his son, 

The palace-heir ; as little do they dread 

The vengeance of the gods ; they long to share 

Among them the possessions of the king, 

So many years unheard from. But this thought ^5 

Comes to my mind again, and yet again : 

Wrong were it, while the son is yet alive, 

To drive the cattle to a foreign land, 

Where alien men inhabit ; yet 't is worse 

To stay and tend another's beeves, and bear 17° 

This spoil. And long ago would I have fled 

To some large-minded monarch, since this waste 

Is not to be endured, but that I think 

Still of my suffering lord, and hope that yet 

He may return and drive the suitors hence." 275 

Ulysses, the sagacious, answering, said : 
" Herdsman, since thou dost seem not ill inclined, 
Nor yet unwise, and I perceive in thee 
A well-discerning mind, I therefore say, 
And pledge my solemn oath, — Jove, first of gods, 280 
Be witness, and this hospitable board 
And hearth of good Ulysses, which has here 



Book xx. 205 

Received me, — while thou art within these halls 
Ulysses will assuredly return, 

And, if thou choose to look, thine eyes shall see ^s 

The suitors slain, who play the master here." 

And thus the master of the herds rejoined : 
" Stranger, may Jupiter make good thy words ! 
Then shalt thou see what strength is in my arm." 

EumcEus also prayed to all the gods, *9° 

That now the wise Ulysses might return. 
So talked they with each other, while apart 
The suitors doomed Telemachus to death, 
And plotted how to take his life. Just then 
A bird — an eagle — on the left flew by, 195 

High up ; his talons held a timid dove. 
And then Amphinomus bespake the rest : — 

" O friends, this plan to slay Telemachus 
Must fail. And now repair we to the feast." 

So spake Amphinomus, and to his words 3°° 

They all gave heed, and hastened to the halls 
Of the divine Ulysses, where they laid 
Their cloaks upon the benches and the thrones, 
And slaughtering the choice sheep, and fading goats, 
And porkers, and a heifer from the herd, 3°5 

Roasted the entrails, and distributed 



206 The Odyssey. 

A share to each. Next mingled they the wine 

In the large bowls. The swineherd brought a cup 

To every one. Philcetius, chief among 

The servants, gave from shapely canisters 3 10 

The bread to each. Melanthius poured the wine. 

Then putting forth their hands, they all partook 

The ready banquet. With a wise design, 

Telemachus near the stone threshold placed 

Ulysses, on a shabby seat, beside 3«5 

A little table, but within the walls 

Of that strong-pillared pile. He gave him there 

Part of the entrails, and poured out for him 

The wine into a cup of gold, and said : — 

" Sit here, and drink thy wine among the rest, 3*° 

And from the insults and assaults of these 
It shall be mine to guard thee. For this house 
Is not the common property of all ; 
Ulysses first acquired it, and for me. — 
And you, ye suitors, keep your tongues from taunts 3*5 
And hands from force, lest there be wrath and strife." 

He spake ; the suitors, as they heard him, bit 
Their pressed lips, wondering at Telemachus, 
Who uttered such bold words. Antinoiis then, 
Eupeithes' son, bespake his fellows thus : — 33° 



, Book xx. 207 

" Harsh as they are, let us, O Greeks, endure 
These speeches of Telemachus. He makes 
High threats, but had Saturnian Jove allowed, 
We should, ere this, and in these very halls, 
Have quieted our loud-tongued orator." 335 

So spake the suitor, but Telemachus 
Heeded him not. Then through the city came 
The heralds with a hallowed hecatomb, 
Due to the gods. The long-haired people thronged 
The shady grove of Phoebus, archer-god. 34° 

Now when the flesh was roasted and was drawn 
From off the spits, and each was given his share, 
They held high festival. The men who served 
The banquet gave Ulysses, where he sat, 
A portion equal to their own, for so 345 

His own dear son Telemachus enjoined. 

Yet did not Pallas cause the haughty crew 
Of suitors to refrain from stinging taunts, 
That so the spirit of Laertes' son 

Might be more deeply wounded. One there was 35° 

Among the suitors, a low-thoughted wretch ; 
Ctesippus was his name, and his abode 
Was Samos. Trusting in his father's wealth, 
He wooed the wife of the long-absent king 



208 The Odyssey. 

Ulysses. To his insolent mates he said : — 355 

" Hear me, ye noble suitors, while I speak. 

This stranger has received an equal share, 

As is becoming; for it were not just 

Nor seemly to pass by, in such a feast, 

The guests, whoe'er they may be, that resort 360 

To this fair mansion of Telemachus. 

I also will bestow on him a gift 

Of hospitality, and he in turn 

May give it to the keeper of the bath, 

Or any other of the menial train 365 

That serve the household of Ulysses here." 

So speaking, with his strong right hand he flung 

A bullock's foot, which from a canister 

Hard by he plucked. Ulysses gently bowed 

His head, and shunned the blow, and grimly smiled. 37° 

The missile struck the solid wall, and then 

Telemachus rebuked the suitor thus : — 

" Ctesippus, well hast thou escaped with' life, 

Not having hit the stranger, who himself 

Shrank from the blow ; else had I pinned thee through 

With my sharp spear. Instead of wedding feast, 376 

Thy father would have celebrated here 

Thy funeral rites. Let no man in these halls 



Book xx. 209 

Bear himself insolently in my sight 

Hereafter, for my reason now is ripe 38° 

To know the right from wrong. I was of late 

A child, and now it is enough to bear 

That ye should slay our sheep, and drink our wine, 

And eat our bread, — for what can one man do 

Against so many ? Cease this petty war 385 

Of wrong and hatred ; but if ye desire 

To take my life, 't is well ; 't were better so. 

And rather would I die by violence 

Than live to see these most unmanly deeds, — 

Guests driven away, and woman-servants hauled 39° 

Through these fair rooms by brutal wassailers." 

He ended, and the assembly all sat mute 
Till Agelaiis spake, Damastor's son : — 

" O friends ! let no man here with carping words 
Gainsay what is so rightly said, nor yet 395 

Insult the stranger more, nor one of those 
Who serve the household of the godlike chief 
Ulysses in his palace. I would say 
This word in kindness to Telemachus 
And to his mother ; may it please them both ! 4°o 

While yet the hope was cherished in your hearts 
That wise Ulysses would return, no blame 

VOL. II. 27 



210 The Odyssey. 

Could fasten on the queen that she remained 

Unwedded, and resisted those who came 

To woo her in the palace. Better so, 405 

Had he come home again. Yet now, 't is clear, 

He comes no more. Go then, Telemachus, 

And, sitting by thy mother, bid her wed 

The noblest of her wooers, and the one 

Who brings the richest gifts ; and thou possess 410 

Thy father's wealth in peace, and eat and drink 

At will, while she shall find another home." 

And thus discreet Telemachus replied : 
" Nay, Agelaiis, for I swear by Jove, 

And by my father's sufferings, who has died, 415 

Or yet is wandering, far from Ithaca, 
That I do nothing to delay the choice 
And marriage of my mother. I consent 
That she become the wife of whom she list, 
And him who offers most. But I should feel 4*° 

Great shame to thrust her forth against her will, 
And with unfilial speeches ; God forbid ! " . 

He ended here, and Pallas, as he spake, 
To inextinguishable laughter moved 

The suitors. There they sat with wandering minds ; 4*5 
They swallowed morsels foul with blood ; their eyes 



Book XX. 2 11 

Were filled with tears ; their hearts foreboded woe. 
Then spake the godlike Theoclymenus : — 

" Unhappy men ! what may this evil be 
That overtakes you ? Every brow and face 43° 

And each one's lower limbs are wrapped in night, 
And moans arise, and tears are on your cheeks. 
The walls and all the graceful cornices 
Between the pillars are bedropped with blood, 
, , The portico is full, these halls are full 43s 

Of shadows, hastening down to Erebus 
Amid the gloom. The sun is blotted out 
From heaven, and fearful darkness covers all." 

He spake, and loud they laughed. Eurymachus, 
The son of Polybus, in answer said : — 44° 

" The stranger prattles idly ; he is come 
From some far land. Conduct him through the door, 
Young men, and send him to the market-place, 
Since all things here are darkened to his eyes." 

Then spake the godlike Theoclymenus : 445 

" Eurymachus, from thee I ask no guide, 
For I have eyes and ears, and two good feet, 
And in my breast a mind as sound as they, 
And by the aid of these I mean to make 
My way without \ for clearly I perceive 45° 



212 The Odyssey. 

A coming evil, which no suitor here 
Will yet escape, — no one who, in these halls 
Of the great chief, Ulysses, treats with scorn 
His fellow-man, and broods o'er guilty plans." 

He spake, and, hastening from that noble pile, 455 

Came to Pirasus, in whose house he found 
A welcome. All the suitors, as he went, 
Looked at each other, and, the more to vex 
Telemachus, kept laughing at his guests. 
And thus an insolent youth among them said : — 460 

"No man had ever a worse set of guests 
Than thou, Telemachus. For what a wretch 
That wandering beggar is, who always wants 
His bread and wine, and is unfit for work, 
And has no strength ; in truth, a useless load 465 

Upon the earth he treads. The other guest 
Rises to play the prophet. If thou take 
My counsel, which I give thee for thy good, 
Let them at once be put on board a bark 
Of many oars, and we will send them hence 47° 

To the Sicilians ; they will bring a price." 

So talked the suitors, but he heeded not 
Their words, and, looking toward his father, held 
His peace, expecting when he would lay hands 



Book xx. 213 

Upon that insolent crew. Penelope, 47s 

Sage daughter of Icarius, took her place 

Right opposite upon a sumptuous seat, 

And heard the words of every man who spake 

Within the hall. They held that midday feast 

With laughter^ — a luxurious feast it was, 480 

And mirthful ; many victims had been slain 

To furnish forth the tables ; but no feast 

Could be more bitter than the later one, 

To which the goddess and that valiant man 

Would bid the guilty crew of plotters soon. 485 



BOOK XXI. 

"DALLAS, the goddess of the azure eyes, 

Woke in the mind of sage Penelope, 
The daughter of Icarius, this design, — 
To put into the suitors' hands the bow 
And gray steel rings, and to propose a game s 

That in the palace was to usher in 
The slaughter. So she climbed the lofty stair, 
Up from the hall, and took in her plump hand 
The fair carved key; its wards were wrought of brass, 
And ivory was the handle. Soon she reached 10 

The furthest room with her attendant maids. 
There lay the treasures of Ulysses, — brass 
And gold, and steel divinely wrought. There lay 
His bow unstrung ; there lay his quiver charged 
With arrows ; many were the deadly shafts is 

It held, a stranger's gift, who met him once 
In Lacedasmon, Iphitus by name, 
The son of Eurytus, and like the gods 



Book XXL 21 5 

In presence. In Messene met the twain, 

And in the mansion of Orsilochus, *° 

The warlike. Thither had Ulysses come 

To claim a debt from all the region round ; 

For rovers from Messene to their ships 

Had driven and carried off from Ithaca 

Three hundred sheep and those who tended them. *5 

For this Ulysses, though a stripling yet, 

Came that long voyage, on an embassy, 

Sent by his father and the other chiefs. 

And Iphitus had come in search of steeds 

Which he had lost, — twelve mares, and under them 3° 

Twelve hardy mules, their foals. That errand brought 

The doom of death upon him. For he came, 

In journeying, to the abode of Hercules, 

The mighty hero-son of Jupiter, 

Famed for his labors, who, in his own house, 35 

Slew Iphitus, the stranger. Cruel wretch ! 

Who reverenced not the vengeance of the gods, 

Nor what was due to his own board, at which 

He placed his guest, and slew him afterward, 

And in his stables kept the goodly mares. 4° 

'T was when this guest was seeking for his steeds 

He met Ulysses, and bestowed on him 



216 The Odyssey. 

The bow, which mighty Eurytus once bore, 

And dying in his lofty palace left 

The weapon to his son. Ulysses gave 45 

In turn^a trenchant sword and massive lance, 

A pledge of kindly hospitality, 

Begun, but not continued till they sat 

Each at the other's table ; for the son 

Of Jove first took the life of him who gave 50 

The bow, the godlike son of Eurytus. 

That bow Ulysses, when he went to war 

In his black galleys, never took with him, 

But left it in his palace, to be kept 

In memory of a beloved friend, 55 

And only bore it in his own domain. 

Now when the glorious lady reached the room, 
And stood upon the threshold, wrought of oak 
And polished by the workman's cunning hand, 
Who stretched the line upon it, and set up 60 

Its posts, and hung its shining doors, she loosed 
With a quick touch the thong that held the ring, 
Put in the key, and with a careful aim 
Struck back the sounding bolts. As when a bull 
Roars in the field, such sound the beautiful doors, 65 

Struck with the key, gave forth, and instantly 



Book xxi. 217 

They opened to her. Up the lofty floor 

She stepped, where stood the coffer that contained 

The perfumed garments. Reaching forth her hand, 

The queen took down the bow, that hung within 7° 

Its shining case, and sat her down, and laid 

The case upon her knees, and, drawing forth 

The monarch's bow, she wept aloud. As soon 

As that new gush of tears had ceased to fall, 

Back to the hall she went, and that proud throng 75 

Of suitors, bearing in her hand the bow 

Unstrung, and quiver, where the arrows lay 

Many and deadly. Her attendant maids 

Brought also down a coffer, where were laid 

Much brass and steel, provided by the king 80 

For games like these. The glorious lady then, 

In presence of the suitors, stood beside 

The columns that upheld the stately roof. 

She held a lustrous veil before her cheeks, 

And, while on either side of her a maid 85 

Stood modestly, bespake the suitors thus : — 

" Hear, noble suitors ! ye who throng these halls, 
And eat and drink from day to day, while long 
My husband has been gone ; your sole excuse 
For all this lawlessness the claim ye make 90 

VOL. II. 28 



218 The Odyssey. 

That I become a bride. Come then, for now 

A contest is proposed. I bring to you 

The mighty bow that great Ulysses bore. 

Whoe'er among you he may be whose hand 

Shall bend this bow, and send through these twelve rings 

An arrow, him I follow hence, and leave 9« 

This beautiful abode of my young years, 

With all its plenty, — though its memory, 

I think, will haunt me even in my dreams." 

She spake, and bade the master of the swine, mo 

The good Eumsus, place the bow and rings 
Of hoary steel before the suitor-train. 
In tears he bore the bow and laid it down. 
The herdsman also wept to see again 
His master's bow. Antinoiis called to both 105 

With a loud voice, and chid them angrily : — 

"Ye silly rustics, who can never see 
Beyond the hour, why trouble with your tears 
The lady who had grief enough besides 
For her lost husband ? Sit and share the feast no 

In silence, or go forth and leave the bow ; 
A difficult contest it will be for us, 
Nor, as I think, will this fair bow be bent 
With ease, since surely there is no man here 



Book xxi. 219 

Such as Ulysses was. I saw him once, "5 

While but a child, and still remember him." 

He spake, yet in his secret heart believed 
That he should bend the bow, and send a shaft 
Through all the rings. And yet he was the first 
To taste the steel, — an arrow from the hand '*> 

Of the great chief Ulysses, — whom he wronged 
In his own palace, and to equal wrong 
Encouraged others. Then Telemachus 
Rose in his sacred might, and thus began : — 

" Alas ! it must be that Saturnian Jove i*s 

Has made me lose my wits. Wise as she is, 
My mother promises to leave her home 
And follow some one else, and yet I laugh, 
And am delighted in my foolish heart. 
Come then, since such a contest is proposed, 13° 

Ye suitors ! and for such a woman too. 
The like is not in all the lands of Greece, 
Argos, Mycena?, or the hallowed shore 
Of Pylos, or in Ithaca itself, 

Or the dark mainland coast. Ye know it well ; us 

Why should I praise my mother? Come then, all; 
Let there be no excuses for delay, 
Nor longer leave the bow untried, that we 



220 The Odyssey. 

May see the event. I too am moved to try ; 

And if I bend the bow, and send a shaft 14° 

Through all the rings, my gracious mother then 

Will not, to my great grief, renounce her home, 

And, following another, leave me here, 

Although my prowess even now might win 

The glorious prizes that my father won." 145 

He spake and, rising, from his shoulders took 
The purple cloak, and laid the trenchant sword 
Aside ; and first he placed the rings of steel 
In order, opening for them in the ground 
A long trench by a line, and stamping close »s° 

The earth around them. All admired the skill 
With which he ranged them, never having seen 
The game before. And then he took his place 
Upon the threshold, and essayed the bow ; 
And thrice he made the attempt, and thrice gave o'er, 155 
Yet hoping still to draw the cord, and send 
An arrow through the rings. He would have drawn 
The bow at the fourth trial, but a nod 
Given by his father caused him to forbear, 
Though eager for the attempt. And then again 160 

The princely youth bespake the suitors thus : — 

" Well, this is strange ! I may hereafter prove 



Book XXL 221 

A craven and a weakling, or perchance 

Am yet too young, and cannot trust my arm 

To do me right against the man who first «6s 

Assaults me. Come then, ye whose strength excels 

My own, and try the bow, and end the strife." 

He spake, and setting down the bow to lean 
Against the firm smooth panels of the wall, 
And the swift shaft against the bow's fair curve, '7° 

He took again his seat upon the throne 
From which he rose. And then Eupeithes 5 son, 
Antinous, to the crowd of suitors said : — 

" Rise one by one, my friends, from right to left. 
Begin where he begins who pours the wine." 175 

So spake Antinous, and the rest approved. 
Then rose Leiodes, son of CEnops, first. 
He was their seer, and always had his seat 
Beside the ample bowl. From deeds of wrong 
He shrank with hatred, and was sore incensed 180 

Against the suitors all. He took the bow 
And shaft, and, going to the threshold, stood 
And tried the bow, yet bent it not ; it galled 
His hands, for they were soft, and all unused 
To such a task ; and thus at length he spake : — is s 

" O friends, I bend it not ; another hand 



222 The Odyssey. 

Must try. This bow, upon this very spot, 

Will take from many a prince the breath of life. 

And better were it thus to die, by far, 

Than, living, fail of that intent for which 19° 

We haunt this place, and still from day to day 

Assemble. There is many a one whose wish 

And hope are strong to wed Penelope, 

The consort of Ulysses ; but so soon 

As he shall see and try the hero's bow 195 

Let him with marriage presents seek to gain 

Some other bride among the long-robed dames, 

Achaia's daughters. Let him leave the queen 

To wed the suitor who shall bring to her 

The richest gifts, and him whom fate appoints." 200 

He spake, and setting down the bow to lean 
Against the firm smooth panels of the wall, 
And the swift shaft against the bow's fair curve, 
He took again his seat upon the throne 
From which he rose. Antinoiis then took up 205 

The word and answered, and reproached him thus : — 

" What words are these, Leiodes, that have passed 
Thy lips? harsh words and fearful, — that this bow 
Shall take from many princes here the breath 
Of life, and all because thou hast no power no 



Book xxi. 223 

To bend it ? Thy good mother bore thee not 
To draw the bow and send the arrow forth, 
But others of the noble suitor-train 
Are here, by whom this bow shall yet be bent." 

Then to Melanthius, keeper of the goats, 215 

Antinoiis gave this bidding. " Light a fire 
With speed, Melanthius, in the palace here, 
And place a seat before it. Lay a fleece 
Upon the seat, and bring us from within 
An ample roll of fat, that we young men 220 

By warming and anointing may make soft 
The bow, and draw the cord, and end the strife." 

He spake ; Melanthius kindled instantly 
A glowing fire, and near it placed a seat, 
And on the seat a fleece, and from within 225 

Brought forth an ample roll of fat, with which 
The young men, having warmed it, smeared the bow 
And tried, but bent it not, too weak by far 
For such a feat. Antinoiis kept aloof, 
He and the godlike youth Eurymachus, a 3 o 

Two princes who in might excelled the rest. 

The herdsman of Ulysses meantime left 
The palace, and with him the swineherd went, 
And after them Ulysses. When they all 



224 The Odyssey. 

Were now without the gate and palace court, *35 

Ulysses spake to them, and blandly said : — 

" Herdsman and swineherd, shall I say to you 
Somewhat, or shall I keep it back ? My heart 
Moves me to say it. Should Ulysses come, 
Led by some god, and suddenly, what aid 24° 

Would he receive from you ? Would ye take part 
With him, or with the suitors ? Frankly speak ; 
And tell me what your hearts would bid you do." 

Then answered thus the keeper of the herds : 
" O Father Jove ! wouldst thou but grant my wish, »45 
And let some god conduct him hither, then 
Shall it be seen what might is in these hands ! " 

So also did Eumasus offer prayer 
To all the deities, that speedily 

The wise Ulysses might return ; and when *s° 

The chief perceived in all its truth the thought 
And purpose of their hearts, he spake and said : — 

" Know, then, that I myself am he, at home 
Again, returning in the twentieth year, 
And after many sufferings, to the land 15s 

That saw my birth. I know that I am come 
Welcome to you alone of all my train 
Of servants, since I hear no others pray 



Book xxi. 225 

For my return. Hear, then, what I engage 

Shall be hereafter. If some god o'ercome *6° 

For me these arrogant suitors, I will give 

To each of you a wife and lands, and build 

For each a house near mine, and ye shall be 

The friends and brothers of Telemachus 

Thenceforth. And now, that ye may surely know ^5 

And trust me, I will show a token here, — 

A scar which once the white tooth of a boar 

Made, when long since, on the Parnassian mount, 

I hunted with Autolycus's sons." 

Thus having said, he drew from the broad scar 37° 

The covering rags ; they looked and knew it well, 
And wept, and round Ulysses threw their arms, 
And kissed in that embrace the hero's head 
And shoulders, while Ulysses also kissed 
Their heads and hands. The sun would have gone down 
Upon their weeping, but for him. He said : — ^6 

" Cease now from tears, lest some one from the hall 
Should see us, and report of us within. 
Now let us enter, not in company, — 
I first, and ye thereafter, one by one, 280 

And let the sign be this : the others all — 
The haughty suitors — will refuse to me 

VOL. II. Z9 



226 The Odyssey. 

The bow and quiv.er. When thou bearest it, 

My noble friend Eumaeus, through the halls, 

Bring it and place it in my hands, and charge 185 

The women to make fast the solid doors ; 

And then if any one of them should hear 

A groan or other noise of men within, 

Let her not issue forth, but silently 

Pursue her task. Meantime be it thy care, 29° 

My good Philoetius, with a key to lock 

The portals of the court and fix the chain." 

Thus having said, into that noble pile 
He passed again, and took the seat from which 
He lately rose, and afterward, in turn, »9S 

Entered the servants of the godlike chief. 

Eurymachus was busy with the bow, 
Turning and warming it before the blaze 
On both its sides. He could not bend it thus. 
There came a deep sigh from his boastful heart, 3°° 

And greatly was he vexed, and sadly said : — 

" Alas ! great cause of grief indeed is here 
For me and all. 'T is not that I lament 
So much the losing of the bride, although 
That also vexes me, — there yet remain 3°s 

Many fair ladies of the Achaian stock, 



Book xxl 227 

Both in the sea-girt lands of Ithaca 

And other regions, — yet if we be found 

To fall in strength of arm so far below 

The great Ulysses that we cannot bend 3'° 

His bow, our sons will hear of it with shame." 

Eupeithes' son, Antinoiis, answered thus : 
" Not so, Eurymachus, as thou thyself 
Shouldst know. This day is held a solemn feast 
Of Phoebus by the people. Who would draw 31s 

The bow to-day ? Nay, lay it by in peace, 
And suffer all the rings to stand as now ; 
For no man, as I think, will dare to come 
Into the palace of Laertes' son 

And take them hence. Let him who bears the cup 320 
Begin to serve the wine, that, having poured 
Part to the gods, we may lay down the bow, 
And with the morning let Melanthius come, — 
The goatherd, — bringing with him from the flock 
The choicest goats, that we may burn the thighs, 325 

An. offering to the god of archery, 
Apollo. Then will we again essay 
The bow, and bring the contest to an end." 

So spake Antinoiis, and they all approved. 
Then heralds came, and on the suitors' hands 330 



228 The Odyssey. 

Poured water ; youths filled up the cups with wine, 

Beginning at the right, and gave to each 

His share ; and when they all had poured a part, 

And each had drunk, the shrewd Ulysses thus 

With artful speech bespake the suitor-train : — 33s 

" Hearken, ye suitors of the illustrious queen, 
To what my heart is prompting me to say ; 
But chiefly to Eurymachus I make 
My suit, and to Antinous, who so well 
Hath counselled to lay by the bow and trust 340 

The gods. To-morrow Phoebus will bestow 
The needed strength on whomsoe'er he will; 
But let me take that polished bow, and try 
Among you, whether still the power that -dwelt 
In these once pliant limbs abides in them, 34s 

Or whether haply it has passed from, me 
Amid my wanderings and a life of want." 

He spake, and all were vehemently moved , 
With anger, for they feared that he would bend 
The bow, and thus Antinous, railing, spake : — • 350 

" Thou worthless vagabond, without a spark 
Of reason, art thou not content to sit 
And banquet with the proudest, where no part 
Of all the feast escapes thee, hearing all 



Book xxi. 229 

That we are saying, which no other man, 355 

Stranger and beggar, is allowed to hear ! 

This good wine makes thee foolish, as wine oft 

Makes those who swallow it too greedily, 

And drink not with due stint. It maddened once 

Eurytion, the famed Centaur, in the halls 36° 

Of the large-souled Pirithoiis. He had come 

Among the Lapithae, and when inflamed 

With wine to madness, in those very halls 

Did lawless deeds. The heroes were incensed. 

They rushed upon him, dragged him through the porch 

And out of doors, and there cut off his nose 366 

And ears, and he departed, frenzied still, 

And bearing in bewilderment of mind 

His punishment, whence war arose between 

Centaurs and men ; yet surely he had brought 370 

The evil on himself, when overcome 

With wine. Such fearful mischief I foretell 

Will light on thee, if thou shouldst bend this bow, 

Nor canst thou hope for favor here among 

The people. We will send thee speedily, 37s 

In a black galley, to King Echetus, 

The enemy of human kind, from whom 

Thou shalt find no escape. Drink, then, in peace 



230 The Odyssey. 

Thy wine, and seek no strife with younger men." 

Then spake the sage Penelope again : 38° 

" Truly, Antinoiis, it becomes thee not, 
Nor is it just, to vex the stranger guests 
Who seek the palace of Telemachus. 
Dost thou, then, think that, should this stranger bend, 
Proud as he is of his great strength of arm, 385 

The mighty bow that once Ulysses bore, 
He leads me hence a bride ? No hope of that 
Is in his heart, and let no one of you 
Who banquet here allow a thought like that 
To vex him ; 't is a thing that cannot be." 390 

Then to the queen, Eurymachus, the son 
Of Polybus, replied : " We do not fear, 
Sage daughter of Icarius, that this man 
Will lead thee hence a bride ; it cannot be. 
We fear the speech of men and women both. 395 

The very meanest of the Achaian race 
Will say : ' Degenerate men are these, who seek 
To wed the consort of a glorious chief, 
Not one of whom can draw the bow he bore; 
And now there comes a wandering beggar-man, 400 

Who draws the bow with ease, and sends a shaft 
Through all the rings of steel.' Thus will they speak, 



Book xxl 231 

And this will be to us a cause of shame ! " 

And then the sage Penelope rejoined : 
" Eurymachus, it cannot be that those 4°s 

Should earn the general praise who make the wealth 
Of a most worthy man their spoil, and bring 
Dishonor on his house. The stranger's frame 
Is powerful and well knit ; he claims to be 
Of noble parentage. Now let him take 41° 

The bow, and we will see the event ; but this 
I promise, and will make my promise good, 
If he should bend it, — if Apollo give 
To him that glory, — he shall have from me 
A tunic and a cloak, fair garments both, 415 

And a keen javelin, his defence against 
Both dogs and men, a two-edged sword besides, 
And sandals for his feet, and I engage 
To send him whither he desires to go." 

Then spake discreet Telemachus again : 42° 

" Mother, in all Achaia there is none 
Who has more power than I can claim, to grant 
Or to deny the bow to whom I will. 
No one of those who rule the rugged coast 
Of Ithaca, or isles where Elis breeds 425 

Her mares, may interpose to thwart my will, 



232 The Odyssey. 

If on the stranger I bestow the bow 

To be his own, and bid him take it hence. 

Withdraw, O queen, into thy bower ; direct 

Thy household tasks, the distaff and the web, 43° 

And bid thy maidens speed the work. The bow 

Belongs to men, and most to me ; for here, 

Within these walls, the authority is mine." 

The queen, astonished, heard him and withdrew, 
But kept her son's wise sayings in her heart. 435 

And then ascending to her bower, among 
Her maids, she wept her well-beloved lord, 
Ulysses, till the blue-eyed Pallas came, 
And poured upon her lids the balm of sleep. 

Meantime the worthy swineherd bore the bow 440 

In hand, and all along the palace-halls 
The suitor-crew were chiding him aloud, 
And thus an insolent youth among them spake : — 

" Thou awkward swineherd, whither goest thou 
With the curved bow ? Thy own fleet dogs which thou 
Hast reared shall soon devour thee, far from men 446 

And midst thy herds of swine, if we find grace 
With Phoebus and the other deathless gods." 

Such were their words ; the swineherd where he stood 
Set down the bow in fear, for many a voice 450 



Book xxi. 2 $3 

Called to him in the hall. On the other side 
Shouted Telemachus with threatening words : — 

"Nay, father, carry on the bow, nor think 
To stop at every man's command ; lest I, 
Though younger than thyself, cast stones at thee, 455 

And chase thee to the fields, for I in strength 
Excel thee. Would that I excelled as far 
In strength of arm the suitors in these halls, 
Then would I roughly through the palace-gates 
Drive many who are plotting mischief now." 46° 

He spake, and all with hearty laughter heard 
His words, and for their sake allowed their wrath 
Against the prince to cool. The swineherd went 
Forward, along the hall, and, drawing near 
The wise Ulysses, gave into his hands 46s 

The bow ; and then he called the nurse aside, 
Dame Eurycleia, and bespake her thus : — 

'•' Sage Eurycleia, from Telemachus 
I charge thee to make fast the solid doors, 
And then, if any of the maids should hear 470 

A groan or other noise of men within, 
Let her not issue forth, but silently 
Pursue the task in hand, and keep her place." 

He spake, nor were his words in vain. The dame 

VOL. IL 30 



234 The Odyssey. 

Made fast the doors of that magnificent hall, 475 

While silently Philoetius hastened forth 

And locked the portals of the high-walled court. 

A cable of the bark of Byblos lay 

Beneath the portico, — it once had served 

A galley, — and with this the herdsman tied 480 

The portals, and, returning, took the seat 

Whence he had risen, but ever kept his eye 

Fixed on his lord. Ulysses, meantime, held 

The bow, and, turning it, intently eyed 

Side after side, and tried each part in turn, 485 

For fear that worms, while he was far away, 

Had pierced the horn. At this, a youth among 

The suitors, turning to his neighbor, said : — 

" Lo an inspector and a judge of bows ! 
Perhaps he has a bow like that at home, 49° 

Or else would make one like it. How he shifts 
The thing with busy hands from side to side, — 
The vagabond, well trained in knavish tricks ! " 

Then also said another insolent youth : 
" May he in all things be as fortunate 495 

As now, when he shall try to bend that bow ! " 

Such was their talk ; but when the wary chief 
Had poised and shrewdly scanned the mighty bow, 



Book xxi. 235 

Then, as a singer, skilled to play the harp, 

Stretches with ease on its new fastenings s°° 

A string, the twisted entrails of a sheep, 

Made fast at either end, so easily 

Ulysses bent that mighty bow. He took 

And drew the cord with his right hand ; it twanged 

With a clear sound as when a swallow screams. s°s 

The suitors were dismayed, and all grew pale. 

Jove in' loud thunder gave a sign from heaven. 

The much enduring chief, Ulysses, heard 

With joy the friendly omen, which the son 

Of crafty Saturn sent him. He took up 5«° 

A winged arrow, that before him lay 

Upon a table, drawn ; the others still 

Were in the quiver's womb ; the Greeks were yet 

To feel them. This he set with care against 

The middle of the bow, and toward him drew s's 

The cord and arrow-notch, just where he sat, 

And, aiming opposite, let fly the shaft. 

He missed no ring of all ; from first to last 

The brass-tipped arrow threaded every one. 

Then to Telemachus Ulysses said : — 520 

"Telemachus, the stranger sitting here 
Hath not disgraced thee. I have neither missed 



236 The Odyssey. 

The rings, nor found it hard to bend the bow; 

Nor has my manly strength decayed, as these 

Who seek to bring me to contempt pretend ; 5*5 

And now the hour is come when we prepare 

A supper for the Achaians, while the day 

Yet lasts, and after supper the delights 

Of song and harp, which nobly grace a feast." 

He spake, and nodded to Telemachus, 53° 

His well-beloved son, who girded on 
His trenchant sword, and took in hand his spear, 
And, armed with glittering brass for battle, came 
And took his station by his father's seat. 



BOOK XXII. 

r 1 "HEN did Ulysses cast his rags aside, 

And, leaping to the threshold, took his stand 
On its broad space, with bow and quiver filled 
With arrows. At his feet the hero poured 
The winged shafts, and to the suitors called : — s 

" That difficult strife is ended. Now I take 
Another mark, which no man yet has hit. 
Now shall I see if I attain my aim, 
And, by the aid of Phoebus, win renown." 

He spake ; and, turning, at Antinoiis aimed i° 

Tne bitter shaft, — Antinoiis, who just then 
Had grasped a beautiful two-eared cup of gold, 
About to drink the wine. He little thought 
Of wounds and death ; for who, when banqueting 
Among his fellows, could suspect that one 15 

Alone against so many men would dare, 
However bold, to plan his death, and bring 
On him the doom of fate ? Ulysses struck 



238 The Odyssey. 

The suitor with the arrow at the throat. 

The point came through the tender neck behind, »° 

Sideways he sank to earth ; his hand let fall 

The cup ; the dark blood in a thick warm stream 

Gushed from the nostrils of the smitten man. 

He spurned the table with his feet, and spilled 

The viands ; bread and roasted meats were flung *s 

To lie polluted on the floor. Then rose 

The suitors in a tumult, when they saw 

The fallen man ; from all their seats they rose 

Throughout the hall, and to the massive walls 

Looked eagerly ; there hung no buckler there, 3° 

No sturdy lance for them to wield. They called 

Thus to Ulysses with indignant words : — 

" Stranger ! in evil hour hast thou presumed 
To aim at men ; and thou shalt henceforth bear 
Part in no other contest. Even now 35 

Is thy destruction close to thee. Thy hand 
Hath slain the noblest youth in Ithaca. 
The vultures shall devour thy flesh for this." 

So each one said ; they deemed he had not slain 
The suitor wittingly ; nor did they see, 4° 

Blind that they were, the doom which in that hour 
Was closing round them all. Then with a frown 



Book xxii. 239 

The wise Ulysses looked on them, and said : — 

" Dogs ! ye had thought I never would come back 
From Ilium's coast, and therefore ye devoured 45 

My substance here, and offered violence 
To my maid-servants, and pursued my wife 
As lovers, while I lived. Ye dreaded not 
The gods who dwell in the great heaven, nor feared 
Vengeance hereafter from the hands of men ; 5° 

And now destruction overhangs you all." 

He spake, and all were pale with fear, and each 
Looked round for some escape from death. Alone 
Eurymachus found voice, and answered thus : — 

" If thou indeed be he, the Ithacan 55 

Ulysses, now returned to thine old home, 
Well hast thou spoken of the many wrongs 
Done to thee by the Achaians in thy house 
And in thy fields. But there the man lies slain 
Who was the cause of all. Antinoiis first 60 

Began this course of wrong. Nor were his thoughts 
So much of marriage as another aim, — 
Which Saturn's son denied him, — to bear rule 
Himself o'er those who till the pleasant fields 
Of Ithaca, first having slain thy son 65 

In ambush. But he now has met his fate. 



240 The Odyssey. 

Spare, then, thy people. We will afterward 

Make due amends in public for the waste 

Here in thy palace of the food and wine. 

For each of us shall bring thee twenty beeves, 70 

And brass and gold, until thy heart shall be 

Content. Till then we cannot blame thy wrath." 

Sternly the wise Ulysses frowned, and said : 
" Eurymachus, if thou shouldst offer me 
All that thou hast, thy father's wealth entire, 75 

And add yet other gifts, not even then 
Would I refrain from bloodshed, ere my hand 
Avenged my wrongs upon the suitor-crew. 
Choose then to fight or flee, whoever hopes 
Escape from death and fate; yet none of you 80 

Will now, I think, avoid that bitter doom." 

He spake. At once their knees and head grew faint, 
And thus Eurymachus bespake the rest : — 

" This man, O friends, to his untamable arm . 
Will give no rest, but with that bow in hand, 85 

And quiver, will send forth from where he stands 
His shafts, till he has slain us all. Prepare 
For combat then, and draw your swords, and hold 
The tables up against his deadly shafts, 
And rush together at him as one man, 9° 



Book xxii. 241 

And drive him from the threshold through the door. 
Then, hurrying through the city, let us sound 
The alarm, and soon he will have shot his last." 

He spake, and, drawing his keen two-edged sword 
Of brass, sprang toward him with a dreadful cry, 95 

Just as the great Ulysses, sending forth 
An arrow, smote the suitor on the breast, 
Beside the nipple. The swift weapon stood 
Fixed in his liver ; to the ground he flung 
The sword, and, reeling giddily around «°° 

The table, fell ; he brought with him to earth 
The viands and the double cup, and smote 
The pavement with his forehead heavily, 
And in great agony. With both his feet 
He struck and shook his throne, and darkness came «°5 
Over his eyes. Then rushed Amphinomus 
Against the glorious chief, and drew his sword 
To thrust him from the door. Telemachus 
O'ertook him, and between his shoulders drove 
A brazen lance. Right through his breast it went, "o 
And he fell headlong, with his forehead dashed 
Against the floor. Telemachus drew back, 
And left his long spear in Amphinomus, 
Lest, while he drew it forth, some one among 

VOL. II. 31 



242 The Odyssey. 

The Achaians might attack him with the sword, "s 

And thrust him through or hew him down. In haste 
He reached his father's side, and -quickly said : — 

" Now, father, will I bring to thee a shield, 
Two javelins, and a helmet wrought of brass, 
Well fitted to the temples. I will case 120 

Myself in armor, and will also give 
Arms to the swineherd, and to him who tends 
The beeves ; for men in armor combat best." 

And wise Ulysses answered : " Bring them then, 
And quickly, while I yet have arrows here 125 

For my defence, lest, when I am alone, 
They drive me from my station at the door." 

He spake. Obedient to his father's word, 
Telemachus was soon within the room 
In which the glorious arms were laid. He took 130 

Four bucklers thence, eight spears, and helmets four 
Of brass, each darkened with its horsehair crest, 
And bore them forth, and quickly stood again 
Beside his father. But he first encased 
His limbs in brass ; his followers also put 13s 

Their shining armor on, and took their place 
Beside the wise Ulysses, eminent 
In shrewd devices. He, while arrows yet 



Book xxii. 243 

Were ready to his hand, with every aim 

Brought down a suitor ; side by side they fell. 140 

But when the shafts were spent, the archer-king 

Leaned his good bow beside the shining wall, 

Against a pillar of the massive pile, 

And round his shoulders slung a fourfold shield, 

And crowned his martial forehead with a helm 145 

Wrought fairly, with a heavy horsehair crest 

That nodded gallantly above, and took 

In hand the two stout lances tipped with brass. 

In the strong wall there was a postern door, 
And, near the outer threshold of the pile, 15° 

A passage from it to a narrow lane, 
Closed with well-fitting doors. Ulysses bade 
The noble swineherd take his station there, 
And guard it well, as now the only way 
Of entrance. Agelaiis called aloud 155 

To all his fellows, and bespake them thus : — ■ 

" Friends ! will no one among you all go up 
To yonder postern door, and make our plight 
Known to the people ? Then the alarm would spread, 
And this man haply will have shot his last." »e° 

Melanthius, keeper of the goats, replied : 
" Nay, noble Agelaiis ; 't is too near 



244 The Odyssey. 

The palace gate ; the entrance of the lane 

Is narrow, and a single man, if brave, 

Against us all might hold it. I will bring 1S5 

Arms from the chamber to equip you all ; 

For there within, and nowhere else, I deem, 

Ulysses and his son laid up their arms." 

Thus having said, the keeper of the goats, 
Melanthius, climbed the palace stairs, and gained 170 

The chamber of Ulysses. Taking thence 
Twelve shields, as many spears, as many helms 
Of brass, with each its heavy horsehair plume, 
He came, and gave them to the suitors' hands. 
Then sank the hero's heart, and his knees shook 17s 

As he beheld the suitors putting on 
Their armor, and uplifting their long spears. 
The mighty task appalled him, and he thus 
Bespake Telemachus with winged words : — 

" Telemachus, some woman here, or else 180 

Melanthius, makes the battle hard for us." 

And thus discreet Telemachus replied : — 
" Father, I erred in this. I was the cause, 
And no one else ; I left the solid door 
Ajar; the spy was shrewder far than I. 185 

Now, good Eumsus, shut the chamber door, 



Book xxii. 245 

And see if any of the palace-maids 

Have brought these arms, or if I rightly fix 

The guilt" upon Melanthius, Dolius' son." 

So talked they with each other, while again 19° 

Melanthius, stealing toward the chamber, thought 
To bring yet other shining weapons thence. 
The noble swineherd marked him as he went, 
And quickly drawing near Ulysses said : — 

" Son of Laertes ! nobly born and wise ! 19s 

The knave whom we suspect is on his way 
Up to thy chamber. Tell me now, I pray, 
And plainly, shall I make an end of him, 
If I may prove the stronger man, or bring 
The wretch into thy presence, to endure »oo 

The vengeance due to all the iniquities 
Plotted by him against thee in these halls ? " 

Ulysses, the sagacious, answered thus : 
"Telemachus and I will keep at bay 
The suitors in this place, however fierce 205 

Their onset, while ye two bind fast his hands 
And feet behind his back, and bringing him 
Into the chamber, with the door made fast 
Behind you, tie him with a double cord, 
And draw him up a lofty pillar close «o 



246 The Odyssey. 

To the timbers of the roof, that, swinging there, 
He may live long and suffer grievous pain." 

He spake; they hearkened and obeyed, and went 
Up to the chamber unperceived by him 
Who stood within and searched a nook for arms. *'s 

On each side of the entrance, by its posts, 
They waited for Melanthius. Soon appeared 
The goatherd at the threshold of the room, 
Bearing a beautiful helmet in one hand, 
And in the other a broad ancient shield, »*<> 

Defaced by age and mould. Laertes once, 
The hero, bore it when a youth, but now 
Long time it lay unused, with gaping seams. 

They sprang and seized the goatherd, dragging him 
Back to the chamber by the hair ; and there «5 

They cast him, in an agony of fear, 
Upon the floor, and bound his hands and feet 
With a stout cord behind his back, as bade 
The great Ulysses, much-enduring son 
Of old Laertes. Round him then they looped 23° 

A double cord, and swung him up beside 
A lofty pillar, till they brought him near 
The timbers of the roof. And then didst thou, 
Euma;us, say to him in jeering words : — 



Book xxii. 247 

" Melanthius, there mayst thou keep watch all night 
On a soft bed, a fitting place for thee; 236 

And when the Mother of the Dawn shall come 
Upon her golden seat from ocean's streams, 
Thou wilt not fail to see her. Thou mayst then 
Drive thy goats hither for the suitors' feast." *4° 

They left him in that painful plight, and put 
Their armor on, and closed the shining door, 
And went, and by Ulysses, versed in wiles, 
Stood breathing valor. Four were they who stood 
Upon that threshold, while their foes within 245 

Were many and brave. Then Pallas, child of Jove, 
Drew near, like Mentor both in shape and voice. 
Ulysses saw her, and rejoiced and said : — 

" Come, Mentor, to the aid of one who loves 
And has befriended thee, thy peer in age." 150 

Thus said Ulysses, but believed he spake 
To Pallas, scatterer of hosts. Fierce shouts 
Came from the suitors in the hall, and first, 
Thus Agelaiis railed, Damastor's son : — 

" Mentor, let not Ulysses wheedle thee «55 

To join him, and make war on us, for this 
Our purpose is, and it will be fulfilled : 
When by our hands the father and the son 



248 The Odyssey. 

Are slain, thou also shalt be put to death 

For this attempt, and thy own head shall be »6o 

The forfeit. When we shall have taken thus 

Thy life with our good weapons, we will seize 

On all thou hast, on all thy wealth within 

Thy dwelling or without, and, mingling it 

With the possessions of Ulysses, leave 465 

Within thy palaces no son of thine 

Or daughter living, and no virtuous wife 

Of thine, abiding here in Ithaca." 

He spake, and woke new anger in the heart 
Of Pallas, and she chid Ulysses thus : — *7° 

" Ulysses, thou art not, in might of arm 
And courage, what thou wert when waging war 
Nine years without a pause against the men 
Of Troy for Helen's sake, the child of Jove, 
And many didst thou slay in deadly strife, 275 

And Priam's city, with its spacious streets, 
Was taken through thy counsels. How is it 
That, coming to thy own possessions here 
And thy own palace, thou dost sadly find 
Thy ancient valor fail thee in the strife a«o 

Against the suitors ? Now draw near, my friend, 
And stand by me, and see what I shall do, 



Book xxii. 249 

And own that Mentor, son of Alcimus, 
Amid a press of foes requites thy love." 

She spake, but gave not to Ulysses yet »«s 

The certain victory ; for she meant to put 
To further proof the courage and the might 
Both of Ulysses and his emulous son. 
To the broad palace roof she rose, and sat 
In shape a swallow. Agelaiis now, ^9° 

Damastor's son, cheered on with gallant words 
His friends ; so also did Amphimedon, 
Eurynomus, and Demoptolemus, 
Polyctor's son, Peisander, and with these 
Sagacious Polybus. These six excelled 49s 

In valor all the suitors who survived, 
And they were fighting for their lives. The bow 
And the fleet shafts had smitten down their peers. 
Thus to his fellows Agelaiis spake : — 

" O friends, this man will now be forced to stay 3°° 

His fatal hand. See, Mentor leaves his side, 
After much empty boasting, and those four 
Are at the entrance gate alone. Now aim 
At him with your long spears, — not all at once, 
Let six first hurl their weapons, and may Jove 3=5 

Grant that we strike Ulysses down, and win 

VOL. II. 32 



250 The Odyssey. 

Great glory ! For the others at his side 
We care but little, if their leader fall." 

He spake ; they hearkened. Eagerly they cast 
Their lances. Pallas made their aim to err. 3'° 

One struck a pillar of the massive pile ; 
One struck the panelled door ; one ashen shaft, 
Heavy with metal, rang against the wall. 

And when they had escaped that flight of spears, 
Hurled from the crowd, the much-enduring man, 315 

Ulysses, thus to his companions said : — 

" Now is the time, my friends, to send our spears 
Into the suitor-crowd, who, not content 
With wrongs already done us, seek our lives." 

He spake, and, aiming opposite, they cast 3" 

Their spears. The weapon which Ulysses flung 
Slew Demoptolemus ; his son struck down 
Euryades ; the herdsman smote to death 
Peisander, and the swineherd Elatus. 
These at one moment fell, and bit the dust 3*5 

Of the broad floor. Back flew the suitor-crowd 
To a recess ; and after them the four 
Rushed on, and plucked their weapons from the dead. 

Again the suitors threw their spears ; again 
Did Pallas cause their aim to err. One struck 33° 



Book XXII. 2 si 

A pillar of the massive pile, and one 
The panelled door ; another ashen shaft, 
Heavy with metal, rang against the wall. 
Yet did the weapon of Amphimedon 
Strike lightly on the wrist Telemachus. 335 

The brass just tore the skin. Ctesippus grazed 
The shoulder of Eumaeus with his spear, 
Above the shield ; the spear flew over it 
And fell to earth. Then they who stood beside 
The sage Ulysses, versed in wiles, once more 340 

Flung their keen spears. The spoiler of walled towns, 
. Ulysses, slew Eurydamas ; his son 
Struck down Amphimedon ; the swineherd took 
The life of Polybus ; the herdsman smote 
Ctesippus, driving through his breast the spear, 34s 

And called to him, and gloried o'er his fall : — 

" O son of Polytherses, prompt to rail ! 
Beware of uttering, in thy foolish pride, 
Big words hereafter ; leave it to the gods, 
Mightier are they than we. See, I repay 350 

The hospitable gift of a steer's foot, 
Which once the great Ulysses from thy hand 
Received, as he was passing through this hall." 

Thus spake the keeper of the horned herd. 



252 The Odyssey. 

Meantime, Ulysses slew Damastor's son 35s 

With his long spear, in combat hand to hand. 

Telemachus next smote Evenor's son, 

Leiocritus. He sent the brazen spear 

Into his bowels ; through his body passed 

The weapon, and he fell upon his face. 363 

His forehead struck the floor. Then Pallas held 

On high her fatal aegis. From the roof 

She showed it, and their hearts grew wild with fear. 

They fled along the hall as flees a herd 

Of kine, when the swift gadfly suddenly 365 

Has come among them, and has scattered them 

In springtime, when the days are growing long. 

Meantime, like falcons with curved claws and beaks, 

That, coming from the mountain summits, pounce 

Upon the smaller birds, and make them fly 37° 

Close to the fields among the snares they dread, 

And seize and slay, nor can the birds resist 

Or fly, and at the multitude of prey 

The fowlers' hearts are glad ; so did the four 

Smite right and left the suitors hurrying through 37s 

The palace-hall, and fearful moans arose 

As heads were smitten by the sword, and all 

The pavement swam with blood. Leiodes then 



Book xxii. 253 

Sprang forward to Ulysses, clasped his knees, 

And supplicated him with winged words : — 38° 

" I come, Ulysses, to thy knees. Respect 
And spare me. Never have I said or done, 
Among the women of thy household, aught 
That could be blamed, and I essayed to check 
The wrongs of other suitors. Little heed 385 

They gave my counsels, nor withheld their hands 
From evil deeds, and therefore have they drawn 
Upon themselves an evil fate. But I, 
Who have done nothing, — I their soothsayer, — 
Must I too die ? Then is there no reward 39° 

Among the sons of men for worthy deeds." 

Ulysses, the sagacious, frowned and said : 
" If then, in truth, thou wert as thou dost boast, 
A soothsayer among these men, thy prayer 
Within these palace-walls must oft have been 39s 

That far from me might be the blessed day 
Of my return, and that my wife might take 
With thee her lot, and bring forth sons to thee, 
And therefore shalt thou not escape from death." 

He spake, and seizing with his powerful hand 4°° 

A falchion lying near, which from the grasp 
Of Agelaiis fell when he was slain, 



254 The Odyssey. 

Just at the middle of the neck he smote 

Leiodes, while the words were on his lips, 

And the head fell, and lay amid the dust. 405 

Phemius, the son of Terpius, skilled in song, 
Alone escaped the bitter doom of death. 
He by constraint had sung among the train 
Of suitors, and was standing now beside 
The postern door, and held his sweet-toned lyre, 41° 

And pondered whether he should leave the hall, 
And sit before the altar of the great 
Herceian Jove, where, with Laertes, once 
Ulysses oft had burned the thighs of beeves, 
Or whether he should fling himself before 415 

Ulysses, as a suppliant, at his knees. 
This to his thought seemed wisest, — to approach 
Laertes' son, and clasp his knees. He placed 
His sweet harp on the floor, between the cup 
And silver-studded seat, and went and clasped 4*0 

The hero's knees, and said in winged words : — 

" I come, Ulysses, to thy knees. Respect 
And spare me. It will be a grief to thee, 
Hereafter, shouldst thou slay a bard, who sings 
For gods and men alike. I taught myself 425 

This art ; some god has breathed into my mind 



Book xxii. 255 

Songs of all kinds, and I could sing to thee 

As to a god. O, seek not then to take 

My life ! Thy own dear son Telemachus 

Will bear me witness that not willingly 43° 

Nor for the sake of lucre did I come 

To sing before the suitors at their feasts 

And in thy palace, but was forced to come 

By numbers and by mightier men than I." 

He ceased ; Telemachus, the mighty, heard 435 

And thus bespake his father at his side : — 

" Refrain ; smite not the guiltless with the sword ; 
.And be the herald, Medon, also spared, 
Who in our palace had the care of me 
Through all my childhood ; if he be not slain 44° 

Already by Philcetius, or by him 
Who tends the swine, or if he have not met 
Thyself, when thou wert ranging through the hall." 

He spake, and the sagacious Medon heard, 
As crouching underneath a throne he lay, 445 

Wrapped in the skin just taken from a steer, 
To hide from the black doom of death. He came 
From where he lay, and quickly flung aside 
The skin, and, springing forward, clasped the knees 
Of the young prince, and said in winged words : — 45° 



256 The Odyssey. 

" Dear youth, behold me here ; be merciful ; 
Speak to thy father, that he put not forth 
His sword to slay me, eager as he is 
For vengeance, and incensed against the men 
Who haunt these halls to make his wealth a spoil, 455 

And in their folly hold thyself in scorn." 

He spake ; the sage Ulysses smiled and said : 
" Be of good cheer, since this my son protects 
And rescues thee. Now mayst thou well perceive, 
And say to other men, how much more safe 460 

Is doing good than evil. Go thou forth 
Out of this slaughter to the open court, 
Thou and the illustrious bard, and sit ye there, 
While here within I do what yet I must." 

He spake ; they moved away and left the hall, 465 

And by the altar of almighty Jove 
Sat looking round them, still in fear of death. 

Meantime, Ulysses passed with searching look 
O'er all the place, to find if yet remained 
A single one of all the suitor-crew 47° 

Alive, and skulking from his bitter doom. 
He saw that all had fallen in blood and dust, 
Many as fishes on the shelving beach 
Drawn from the hoary deep by those who tend 



Book xxii. 257 

The nets with myriad meshes. Poured abroad 475 

Upon the sand, while panting to return 

To the salt sea they lie, till the hot sun 

Takes their life from them ; so the suitors lay 

Heaped on each other. Then Ulysses took 

The word, and thus bespake Telemachus : — 480 

" Go now, Telemachus, and hither call 
The nurse, Dame Eurycleia. I would say 
Somewhat to her that comes into my thought." 

So spake the chief. Telemachus obeyed 
The word, and smote the door, and called the nurse : — 485 

" Come hither, ancient dame, who hast in charge 
To oversee the women in their tasks ; 
My father calls thee, and would speak with thee." 

He spake ; nor flew the word in vain ; she flung 
Apart the portals of those stately rooms, 49° 

And came in haste. Before her went the prince. 
Among the corpses of the slain they found 
Ulysses, stained with blood, and grimed with dust. 
As when a lion, who has just devoured 
A bullock of the pasture, moves away, 495 

A terror to the sight, with breast and cheeks 
All bathed in blood ; so did Ulysses seem, 
His feet and hands steeped in the blood of men. 

vol. 11. 33 



258 The Odyssey. 

She, when she saw the corpses and the pools 

Of blood, and knew the mighty task complete, 500 

Was moved to shout for joy. Ulysses checked 

Her eager zeal, and said in winged words : — 

" Rejoice in spirit, dame, but calm thyself, 
And shout not. To exult aloud o'er those 
Who lie in death is an unholy thing. s°s 

The pleasure of the gods, and their own guilt, 
Brought death on these ; for no respect had they 
To any of their fellow-men, — the good 
Or evil, — whosoever he might be 

That came to them, and thus on their own heads 51° 

They drew this fearful fate. Now name to me 
The women of the palace ; let me know 
Who is disloyal, and who innocent." 

Then thus the well-beloved nurse replied : 
" My son, I will declare the truth. There dwell s's 

Here in thy palace fifty serving-maids, 
Whom we have taught to work, to comb the fleece 
And serve the household. Twelve of these have walked 
The way of shame. To me they give no heed, 
Nor to Penelope herself. Thy son 520 

Has just now grown to manhood, and the queen 
Has never suffered him to rule the maids ; 



Book xxii. 259 

But let me now, ascending to her room, — 

The royal bower, — apprise thy wife, to whom 

Some deity has sent the gift of sleep." 5*5 

Ulysses, the sagacious, answered thus : 
" Wake her not yet, but go and summon all 
The women who have wrought these shameful deeds." 

He spake ; the matron through the palace went 
To seek the women, and to bid them come. 539 

Meanwhile, Ulysses called Telemachus, 
The herdsman and the swineherd to his side, 
And thus commanded them with winged words : — 

" Begin to carry forth the dead, and call 
The women to your aid ; and next make clean, 53s 

With water and with thirsty sponges, all 
The sumptuous thrones and tables. When ye thus 
Have put the hall in order, lead away 
The serving-maids, and in the space between 
The kitchen vault and solid outer wall 540 

Smite them with your long swords till they give up 
The ghost, and lose the memory evermore 
Of secret meetings with the suitor-train." 

He spake ; the women came, lamenting loud 
With many tears, and carried forth the dead, 545 

Leaning upon each other as they went. 



260 The Odyssey. 

And placed them underneath the portico 

Of the walled court. Ulysses gave command, 

Hastening their task, as all unwillingly 

They bore the corpses forth. With water next, ss° 

And thirsty sponges in their hands, they cleansed 

The sumptuous thrones and tables. Then the prince, 

Telemachus, with shovels cleared the floor, 

The herdsman and the swineherd aiding him, 

And made the women bear the rubbish forth. 555 

And now when all within was once again 

In seemly order, they led forth the maids 

From that fair pile into the space between 

The kitchen vault and solid outer wall, 

A narrow space from which was no escape, 560 

And thus discreet Telemachus began : — 

"I will not take away these creatures' lives 
By a pure death, — these who so long have heaped 
Reproaches on my mother's head and mine, 
And played the wanton with the suitor-crew." 565 

He spake, and made the hawser of a ship 
Fast to a lofty shaft ; the other end 
He wound about the kitchen vault. So high 
He stretched it that the feet of none who hung 
On it might touch the ground. As when a flock 57° 



Book xxii. 261 

Of broad-winged thrushes or wild pigeons strike 

A net within a thicket, as they seek 

Their perch, and find unwelcome durance there, 

So hung the women, with their heads a-row, 

And cords about their necks, that they might die 57s 

A miserable death. A little while, 

And but a little, quivered their loose feet 

In air. They led Melanthius from the hall 

And through the porch, cut off his nose and ears, 

Wrenched out the parts of shame, a bloody meal 580 

For dogs, and in their anger from the trunk 

Lopped hands and feet. Then having duly washed 

Their feet and hands, they came into the hall, 

And to Ulysses ; they had done their work. 

And then to the dear nurse Ulysses said : — - 585 

" Bring sulphur, dame, the cure of noxious air, 
And fire, that I may purge the hall with smoke ; 
And go, and bid Penelope come down, 
With her attendant women, and command 
That all the handmaids of the household come." 590 

And thus in turn Dame Eurycleia spake : 
" Well hast thou said, my son, but suffer me 
To bring thee clothes, a tunic and a cloak, 
Nor with those rags on thy broad shoulders stand 



262 The Odyssey. 

In thine own palace ; it becomes thee not." 595 

Ulysses, the sagacious, answered thus : 
" First let a fire be kindled in this hall." 

He spake, and Eurycleia, the dear nurse, 
Obeyed, and brought the sulphur and the fire. 
Ulysses steeped in smoke the royal pile, 600 

Both hall and court. The matron, passing through 
The stately palace of Ulysses, climbed 
The stair to find and summon all the maids. 
And forth they issued, bearing in their hands 
Torches, and, crowding round Ulysses, gave 605 

Glad greeting, seized his hands, embraced him, kissed 
His hands and brow and shoulders. The desire 
To weep for joy o'ercame the chief; his eyes 
O'erflowed with tears ; he sobbed ; he knew them all. 



BOOK XXIII. 

T T P to the royal bower the matron went 
^-"^ With an exulting heart, to tell the queen 
That her beloved husband was within. 
With knees that faltered not, and quick light step 
She went, and, standing by her mistress, said : — s 

" Awake, Penelope, dear child, and see 
With thine own eyes what thou hast pined for long. 
Ulysses has returned ; thy lord is here, 
Though late, and he has slain the arrogant crew 
Of suitors, who disgraced his house, and made «<> 

His wealth a spoil, and dared insult his son." 

And thus discreet Penelope replied : 
" The gods, dear nurse, have made thee mad ; for they 
Have power to change the wisest men to fools, 
And make the foolish wise, and they have warped 15 

Thy mind once sound. How canst thou mock me thus, 
Amidst my sorrows, with such idle tales ? 
Why wake me from the pleasant sleep that closed 



264 The Odyssey. 

My lids so softly ? Never have I slept 

So sweetly since Ulysses went from me *° 

To that bad city, which no tongue should name. 

Go, then ; return into the lower rooms. 

Had any of my women save thyself 

Brought such a message to disturb my sleep, 

I would have sent her back into the hall *s 

With angry words ; thy years are thy excuse." 

But Eurycleia, the dear nurse, rejoined : 
" Nay, my dear child, I mock thee not. Most true 
It is that thy Ulysses has returned, 

And here he is at home, as I have said. 3° 

The stranger whom they scoffed at in the hall 
Is he ; and long Telemachus has known 
That he was here, but wisely kept from all 
His father's secret, till he should avenge 
Upon those violent men their guilty deeds." 35 

She ended, and her mistress, overjoyed, 
Sprang from her couch, embraced the aged dame, 
And wept, and said to her in winged words : — 

" Tell me, dear nurse, and truly, if indeed 
Ulysses have returned as thou hast said. 4° 

How smote he those proud suitors ? — he alone, 
And they so many, gathered in the hall." 



Book xxiii. 265 

And thus the well-beloved nurse replied : 
" I saw it not, nor knew of it. I heard 
Only the moanings of the slain, while we 45 

The maids, affrighted, sat in a recess 
Of that well-vaulted chamber ; the firm doors 
Closed us all in, until at length thy son, 
Sent by his father, called me forth. I found 
Ulysses standing midst the dead that lay 5° 

Heaped on each other, everywhere along 
The solid pavement. Thou wouldst have rejoiced 
To see him like a lion with the stains 
Of slaughter on him. Now the suitors lie 
Before the portals of the palace-court, 55 

And he has kindled a great fire, and steeps 
In smoke the noble hall. He bade me come 
To call thee. Follow me, that ye may give 
Your hearts to gladness, — for ye have endured 
Great sorrows both, and your long-cherished hope 60 

Is now fulfilled. He hath returned alive 
To his dear home, and finds thee and his son 
Yet in his palace, and hath terribly 
Avenged himself upon the guilty men 
Who under his own roof have done him wrong." 6s 

Then spake the sage Penelope again : 

VOL. II. 34 



266 The Odyssey. 

" Beloved nurse, exult not overmuch, 

Nor rashly boast. Well is it known to thee, 

Were he to come beneath this roof again, 

How welcome he would be to all, but most 7° 

To me and to the son to whom we gave 

His being. Yet thy tidings are not true. 

Some one of the immortals must have slain 

The arrogant suitors, angry to behold 

Their foul injustice and their many crimes ; 75 

For no respect had they to mortal man, 

Good he might be, or bad, whome'er they met ; 

And therefore have they made an evil end. 

But my Ulysses must have perished far 

From Ithaca, cut off from his return." 80 

Then Eurycleia, the dear nurse, rejoined : 
" What words are these, my child, that pass thy lips ? 
Sayst thou, then, that thy husband, who now stands 
Upon thy hearthstone, never will return ? 
O slow of faith ! but thou wert ever thus. 85 

Come, then, I give a certain proof. I saw 
Myself, when he was at the bath, the scar 
Left on him by the white tusk of a boar, 
And would have told thee, but he laid his hands 
Upon my mouth, and would not suffer me 9 o 



Book xxiii. 267 

To bear the tidings, such his forecast was. 
Now follow me ; I give my life in pledge. 
If I deceive thee, slay me ruthlessly." 

Then spake discreet Penelope again : 
" Dear nurse, though thou in many things art wise, 95 
Think not to scan the counsels of the gods, 
Who live forever. Yet will we descend, 
And meet my son, and look upon the slain, 
And see the avenger by whose hand they fell." 

She spake, and from the royal bower went down, - «°° 
Uncertain whether she should stand aloof 
And question there her lord, or haste to him 
And clasp his hands in hers and kiss his brow. 
But having passed the threshold of hewn stone, 
Entering she took her seat right opposite 105 

Ulysses, in the full glow of the fire, 
Against the other wall. Ulysses sat 
Beside a lofty column with his eyes 
Cast down, and waiting for his high-born wife 
To speak when she had seen him. Long she sat no 

In silence, for amazement overpowered 
Her senses. Sometimes, looking in his eyes, 
She saw her husband there, and then again, 
Clad in those sordid weeds, she knew him not. 



268 The Odyssey. 

Then spake Telemachus, and chid her thus : — »s 

" Mother, unfeeling mother ! hard of heart 
Art thou ; how else couldst thou remain aloof? 
How keep from taking, at my father's side, 
Thy place, to talk with him, and question him ? 
No other wife could bring herself to bear »»° 

Such distance from a husband, just returned 
After long hardships, in the twentieth year 
Of absence, to his native land and her. 
Mother ! thy heart is harder than a stone." 

And thus the sage Penelope replied : "5 

" Dear child, my faculties are overpowered 
With wonder, and I cannot question him, 
Nor even speak to him, nor fix my looks 
Upon his face. But if it be indeed 

Ulysses, and he have returned, we soon 13° 

Shall know each other ; there are tokens known 
To both of us, to none but him and me." 

She ended, and the much-enduring chief 
Ulysses, smiling at her words, bespake 
Telemachus at once, in winged words : — 135 

" Suffer thy mother, O Telemachus, 
To prove me ; she will know me better soon. 
My looks are sordid, and my limbs are wrapped 



Book xxiii. 269 

In tattered raiment, therefore does she think 

Meanly of me, and cannot willingly 140 

Believe that I am he. But let us now 

Consider what most wisely may be done. 

He who hath slain, among a tribe of men, 

A single one with few to avenge his death, 

Flees from his kindred and his native land ; 145 

But we have slain the champions of the realm, 

The flower of all the youth of Ithaca. 

Therefore, I pray thee, think what shall be done." 

And then discreet Telemachus replied : 
" Look thou to that, dear father ; for they say 15° 

That thou of all mankind wert wont to give 
The wisest counsels. None of mortal birth 
In this was deemed thy peer. We follow thee 
With cheerful hearts ; nor will our courage fail, 
I think, in aught that lies within our power." 155 

1 Ulysses, the sagacious, answered thus : 
" Then will I tell thee what I deem most wise. 
First take the bath, and then array yourselves 
In tunics, bid the palace-maidens choose 
Fresh garments ; let the godlike bard, who bears «6o 

The clear-toned harp, be leader, and strike up 
A melody to prompt the festive dance, 



270 The Odyssey. 

That all may say who hear it from without, — 

Whether the passers by or dwellers near, — 

' It is a wedding.' Else throughout the land '65 

The rumor of the slaughter we have wrought 

Among the suitors may have spread before 

We reach our wooded farm, and there consult 

Beneath the guidance of Olympian Jove." 

He spake ; they hearkened and obeyed. They took 17° 
The bath, and then they put their garments on. 
The maids arrayed themselves ; the godlike bard 
Took the curved harp, and woke in all the love 
Of melody, and of the graceful dance. 
The spacious pile resounded to the steps 175 

Of men and shapely women in their mirth, 
And one who stood without was heard to say : — 

" Some one, no doubt, has made the long- wooed queen 
His bride at la'st ; a worthless woman she, 
Who could not, for the husband of her youth, 180 

Keep his fair palace till he came again." 

Such words were said, but they who uttered them 
Knew little what had passed. Eurynome, 
The matron of the palace, meantime took 
Magnanimous Ulysses to the bath i8 S 

In his own dwelling, smoothed his limbs with oil, 



Book xxiii. 271 

And threw a gorgeous mantle over him 

And tunic. Pallas on the hero's head 

Shed grace and majesty ; she made him seem 

Taller and statelier, made his locks flow down 19a 

In curls like blossoms of the hyacinth, 

As when a workman skilled in many arts, 

And taught by Pallas and Minerva, twines 

A golden border round the silver mass, 

A glorious work ; so did the goddess shed 195 

Grace o'er his face and form. So from the bath 

He stepped, like one of the immortals, took 

The seat from which he rose, right opposite 

Penelope, and thus addressed the queen : — 

"Lady, the dwellers of the Olympian heights *oo 

Have given thee an impenetrable heart 
Beyond all other women. Sure I am 
No other wife could bring herself to bear 
Such distance from a husband just returned 
After long hardships, in the twentieth year *°5 

Of absence, to his native land and her. 
Come, nurse, prepare a bed, where by myself 
I may lie down ; an iron heart is hers." 

To this the sage Penelope replied : 
" Nay, sir, 't is not through pride or disregard, **° 



272 The Odyssey. 

Or through excess of wonder, that I act 

Thus toward thee. Well do I remember thee 

As thou wert in the day when thy good ship 

Bore thee from Ithaca. Bestir thyself, 

Dame Eurycleia, and make up with care 215 

A bed without the chamber, which he framed 

With his own hands ; bear out the massive bed, 

And lay upon it seemly coverings, 

Fleeces and mantles for his nightly rest." 

She spake to try her husband ; but, displeased, "° 

Ulysses answered thus his virtuous queen : — 

"O woman, thou hast said unwelcome words. 
Who hath displaced my bed ? That task were hard 
For long-experienced hands, unless some god 
Had come to shift its place. No living man, us 

Even in his prime of years, could easily 
Have moved it, for in that elaborate work 
There was a mystery ; it was I myself 
Who shaped it, no one else. Within my court 
There grew an olive-tree with full-leaved boughs, 230 

A tall and flourishing tree ; its massive stem 
Was like a column. Round it I built up 
A chamber with cemented stones until 
The walls were finished ; then I framed a roof 



Book xxiii. 273 

Above it, and put on the well-glued doors 235 

Close fitting. Next I lopped the full-leaved boughs, 

And, cutting off the trunk above the root, 

Smoothed well the stump with tools, and made of it 

A post to bear the couch. I bored the wood 

With wimbles, placed on it the frame, and carved 240 

The work till it was done, inlaying it 

With silver, gold, and ivory. I stretched 

Upon it thongs of oxhide brightly dyed 

In purple. Now, O wife, I cannot know 

Whether my bed remains as then it was, »45 

Or whether some one from the root has hewn 

The olive trunk, and moved it from its place." 

He spake, and her knees faltered and her heart 
Was melted as she heard her lord recount 
The tokens all so truly ; and she wept, »5° 

And rose, and ran to him, and flung her arms 
About his neck, and kissed his brow, and said : — 

" Ulysses, look not on me angrily, 
Thou who in other things art wise above 
All other men. The gods have made our lot *ss 

A hard one, jealous lest we should have passed 
Our youth together happily, and thus 
Have reached old age. I pray, be not incensed, 

vol. 11. 35 



274 The Odyssey. 

Nor take it ill that I embraced thee not 

As soon as I beheld thee, for my heart *s° 

Has ever trembled lest some one who comes 

Into this isle should cozen me with words ; 

And they who practise fraud are numberless. 

The Argive Helen, child of Jupiter, 

Would ne'er have listened to a stranger's suit 265 

And loved him, had she known that in the years 

To come the warlike Greeks would bring her back 

To her own land. It was a deity 

Who prompted her to that foul wrong. Her thought 

Was never of the great calamity 27° 

Which followed, and which brought such woe on us. 

But now, since thou, by tokens clear and true, 

Hast spoken of our bed, which human eye 

Has never seen save mine and thine, and those 

Of one handmaiden only, Actoris, — 27s 

Her whom my father gave me when I came 

To this thy palace, and who kept the door 

Of our close chamber, — thou hast won my mind 

To full belief, though hard it was to win." 

She spake, and he was moved to tears ; he wept 280 

As in his arms he held his dearly loved 
And faithful wife. As welcome as the land 



Book xxiii. 275 

To those who swim the deep, of whose stout bark 

Neptune has made a wreck amidst the waves, 

Tossed by the billow and the blast, and few 285 

Are those who from the hoary ocean reach 

The shore, their limbs all crested with the brine, 

These gladly climb the sea-beach, and are safe, — 

So welcome was her husband to her eyes. 

Nor would her fair white arms release his neck, 290 

And there would rosy-fingered Morn have found 

Both weeping, but the blue-eyed Pallas planned 

That thus it should not be ; she stayed the night 

When near its close, and held the golden Morn 

Long in the ocean deeps, nor suffered her 495 

To yoke her steeds that bring the light to men, — 

Lampas and Phaethon, swift steeds that bear 

The Morning on her way. Ulysses then, 

The man of forecast, thus bespake his queen : — 

" Not yet, O wife, have we attained the close 300 

Of all our labors. One remains which yet 
I must achieve, toilsome, and measureless, 
In difficulty ; for so prophesied 
The spirit of Tiresias, on the day 

When to the abode of Pluto I went down 3°s 

To ask the seer concerning the return 



276 The Odyssey. 

Of my companions, and my own. But now 
Seek we our couch, dear wife, that, softly laid, 
We may refresh ourselves with welcome sleep." 

Then spake in turn the sage Penelope : 3'° 

"Whenever thou desirest it thy couch 
Shall be made ready, since the gods vouchsafe 
To bring thee back into thy pleasant home 
And to thy native land. But now that thou 
Hast spoken of it, and some deity 315 

Is prompting thee, declare what this new task 
May be. Hereafter I shall hear of it, 
No doubt, nor were it worse to know it now." 

Ulysses, the sagacious, answered thus : 
" Dear wife, why wilt thou ask ? why press me thus ? 320 
Yet will I tell thee truly, nor will keep 
Aught from thee, though thou wilt not gladly hear, 
Nor I relate. Tiresias bade me pass 
Through city after city, till I found 

A people who know not the sea, nor eat 325 

Their food with salt, who never yet beheld 
The red-prowed galley, nor the shapely oars, 
Which are the wings of ships. And this plain sign 
He gave, nor will I keep it back from thee, 
That when another traveller whom I meet 330 



Book xxiii. 277 

Shall say it is a winnowing-fan I bear 

On my stout shoulder, there he bade me plant 

The oar upright in earth, and offer up 

To monarch Neptune there a ram, a bull, 

And sturdy boar, and then, returning home, 33s 

Burn hallowed hecatombs to all the gods 

Who dwell in the broad heaven, each one in turn. 

At last will death come over me, afar 

From ocean, such a death as peacefully 

Shall take me off in a serene old age, 34° 

Amid a people prosperous and content. 

All this, the prophet said, will come to pass." 

And then the sage Penelope rejoined : 
" If thus the immortals make thy later age 
The happier, there is hope that thou wilt find 34s 

Escape from evil in the years to come." 

So talked they with each other. Meantime went 
Eurynome, attended by the nurse, 
And in the light of blazing torches dressed 
With soft fresh drapery a bed ; and when 350 

Their busy hands had made it full and high 
The aged dame withdrew to take her rest 
In her own chamber, while Eurynome, 
Who kept the royal bower, upheld a torch 



278 The Odyssey. 

And thither led the pair, and, when they both 355 

Were in the chamber, went her way. They took 
Their place delighted in the ancient bed. 
The prince, the herdsman, and the swineherd ceased 
Meantime to tread the dance, and bade the maids 
Cease also, and within the palace-rooms, 360 

Dark with night's shadow, sought their place of rest. 
Then came the time of pleasant mutual talk, 
In which that noblest among women spake 
Of wrongs endured beneath her roof from those 
Who came to woo her, — an insatiate crew, — 365 

Who made of beeves and fatlings of the flock 
Large slaughter, and drained many a wine-cask dry. 
Then nobly born Ulysses told what woes 
His valor brought on other men ; what toils 
And suffering he had borne ; he told her all, 370 

And she, delighted, heard him, nor did sleep 
Light on her eyelids till his tale was done. 
And first he told her how he overcame 
The people of Ciconia ; how he passed 
Thence to the rich fields of the race who feed 37s 

Upon the lotus ; what the Cyclops did, 
And how upon the Cyclops he avenged 
The death of his brave comrades, whom the wretch 



Book xxiu. 279 

Had pitilessly slaughtered and devoured. 

And how he came to iEolus, and found 38° 

A friendly welcome, and was sent by him 

Upon his voyage ; yet 't was not his fate 

To reach his native land ; a tempest caught 

His fleet, and far across the fishy deep 

Bore him away, lamenting bitterly. 385 

And how he landed at Telepylus, 

Among the Laestrigonians, who destroyed 

His ships and warlike comrades, he alone 

In his black ship escaping. Then he told 

Of Circe, her deceit and many arts, 390 

And how he went to Pluto's dismal realm 

In his good galley, to consult the soul 

Of him of Thebes, Tiresias, and beheld 

All his lost comrades and his mother, — her 

Who brought him forth, and trained him when a child. 

And how he heard the Sirens afterward, 396 

And how he came upon the wandering rocks, — 

The terrible Charybdis, and the crags 

Of Scylla, — which no man had ever passed 

In safety ; how his comrades slew for food 4°° 

The oxen of the Sun ; how Jupiter, 

The Thunderer, with a bolt of fire from heaven 



280 The Odyssey. 

Smote his swift bark ; and how his gallant crew 

All perished, he alone escaped with life. 

And how he reached Ogygia's isle, he told, 405 

And met the nymph Calypso, who desired 

That he would be her husband, and long time 

Detained and fed him in her vaulted grot, 

And promised that he ne'er should die, nor know 

Decay of age, through all the days to come ; 410 

Yet moved she not the purpose of his heart. 

And how he next through many hardships came 

To the Phaeacians, and they welcomed him 

And honored him as if he were a god, 

And to his native country in a bark 41s 

Sent him with ample gifts of brass and gold 

And raiment. As he uttered this last word, 

Sleep softly overcame him ; all his limbs 

Lay loose in rest, and all his cares were calmed. 

The blue-eyed Pallas had yet new designs ; 4" 

And when she deemed Ulysses was refreshed 
With rest and sleep, in that accustomed bed, 
She called the Morning, daughter of the Dawn, 
To rise from ocean in her car of gold, 
And shed her light on men. Ulysses rose 415 

From his soft couch, and thus enjoined his spouse : — 



Book xxiii. 281 

" O wife ! enough of misery have we borne 
Already, — thou in weeping for my long 
Unhappy absence, — I for years withheld 
By Jupiter and all the other gods 430 

From my return to this dear land, although 
I pined for home. Now since upon this couch 
We take the place so earnestly desired, 
Take thou the charge of all that I possess 
Here in the palace. For the herds and flocks 43s 

Which those high-handed suitors have devoured, 
I shall seize many others as a spoil ; 
The rest the Greeks will bring me, till my stalls 
Are filled again. I hasten to my farm 
Embowered in trees, to greet the aged man 44° 

My excellent father, who continually 
Grieves for me. Prudent as thou art, I give 
This charge; a rumor, with the rising sun, 
Will quickly go abroad that I have slain 
The suitors in the palace. Now withdraw, 445 

Thou and thy maidens, to the upper room, 
And sit and look not forth, nor ask of aught." 

So spake the chief, and on his shoulders braced 
His glorious armor. Then he called his son, 
The herdsman, and the swineherd, bidding them 45° 

VOL. II. 36 



282 The Odyssey. 

To take in hand their weapons. They obeyed, 

And, having armed themselves in brass, they threw 

The portals open. As they all went forth, 

Ulysses led the way. The early light 

Was on the earth, but Pallas, shrouding them 455 

In darkness, led them quickly through the town. 



BOOK XXIV. 

/^~"* YLLENIAN Hermes summoned forth the souls 

Of the slain suitors. In his hand he bore 
The beautiful golden wand, with which at will 
He shuts the eyes of men, or opens them 
From sleep. With this he guided on their way 5 

The ghostly rout ; they followed, uttering 
A shrilly wail. As when a flock of bats, 
Deep in a dismal cavern, fly about 
And squeak, if one have fallen from the place 
Where, clinging to each other and the rock, 10 

They rested, so that crowd of ghosts went forth 
With shrill and plaintive cries. Before them moved 
Beneficent Hermes through those dreary ways, 
And past the ocean stream they went, and past 
Leucadia's rock, the portals of the Sun, >s 

And people of the land of dreams, until 
They reached the fields of asphodel, where dwell 
The souls, the bodiless forms of those who die. 



284 The Odyssey. 

And there they found the soul of Peleus' son, 
His friend Patroclus, and the blameless chief *° 

Antilochus, and Ajax, who excelled 
In stature and in form all other Greeks 
Save the great son of Peleus. These were grouped 
Around Achilles. Then approached the ghost 
Of Agamemnon, Atreus' son ; he seemed »5 

In sorrow, and around him others stood, 
Who in the palace of iEgisthus met 
Their fate and died. The son of Peleus took 
The word, and spake to Agamemnon thus : — 

" Atrides, we had thought that Jove, who wields 30 

The thunder, favored thee, through all thy years, 
Beyond all other men, — thou didst bear rule 
Over so many and such valiant men 
Upon the plain of Troy, where we of Greece 
Endured such sufferings. Yet all too soon 35 

The cruel doom of death, which no man born 
Of woman can escape, has fallen on thee. 
O, if amid the honors of thy sway 
That doom had overtaken thee, while yet 
In Troy's far realm, then would the assembled Greeks 4° 
Have built a tomb to thee ! Thou wouldst have left 
A heritage of glory to thy son ; 



Book xxiv. 285 

Now hast thou died a most unhappy death." 

And then the soul of Agamemnon said : 
" Fortunate son of Peleus, godlike chief 45 

Achilles, who didst die upon the field 
Of Ilium, far from Argos, while there fell 
Around thee many of the bravest sons 
Of Troy and Greece, who fought for thee, and thou 
Wert lying in thy mighty bulk, amid 5° 

Whirlwinds of dust, forgetful evermore 
Of horsemanship. All that day long we fought. 
Nor stayed our hands till Jove, to part us, sent 
A hurricane. When we had borne thee thence 
And brought thee to the fleet, upon a bier 55 

We laid thee, pouring o'er thy shapely limbs 
Warm water, and anointing them with oil. 
Round thee the Achaians stood in tears, hot tears, 
And cut their hair away. From ocean's depth 
Thy mother, when she heard the tidings, rose 60 

With her immortal sea-nymphs. Mournfully 
Came o'er the waves the sound of their lament. 
Trembled the Greeks with fear, and, rushing forth, 
Would have sought refuge in their roomy ships, 
If Nestor, wise in ancient lore, and known 65 

For counsels ever safe, had not restrained 



286 The Odyssey. 

Their haste, and thus declared his prudent thought : — 

" ' Stay, Argives, youths of Greece ; think not of flight ! 
It is his mother ; from the sea she comes 
To her dead son, and brings her deathless nymphs.' ?-> 

" He spake ; .his words withheld the valiant Greeks 
From flight. And now around thee came and stood 
The daughters of the Ancient of the Deep, 
Lamenting bitterly. Upon thy corse 
They put ambrosial robes. The Muses nine 75 

Bewailed thee with sweet voices, answering 
Each other. Then wouldst thou have seen no one 
Of all the Argive host with eyes unwet, 
The Muses' song so moved them. Seventeen days 
And nights we mourned thee, — both the immortal ones 
And mortals. On the eighteenth day we gave %i 

Thy body to the fire* and at the pile 
Slew many fatling ewes, and many an ox 
With crooked horns. In raiment of the gods 
The fire consumed thee 'midst anointing oils %% 

And honey. Many heroes of our host 
In armor and in chariots, or on foot, 
Contended round thy funeral pyre in games, 
And mighty was the din. And when at length 
The fires of Vulcan had consumed thy flesh, 90 



Book xxiv. 287 

We gathered up at morning thy white bones, 

Achilles, pouring over them pure wine 

And fragrant oils. Thy mother brought a vase 

Of gold, which Bacchus gave, she said, the work 

Of Vulcan the renowned, and in it now, 95 

Illustrious son of Peleus, thy white bones 

Are lying, and with thine are mingled those 

Of dead Patroclus Menoetiades. 

Apart we placed the ashes of thy friend 

Antilochus, whom thou didst honor most 100 

After the slain Patroclus. O'er all these 

The sacred army of the warlike Greeks 

Built up a tomb magnificently vast 

Upon a cape of the broad Hellespont, 

There to be seen, far off upon the deep, 105 

By those who now are born, or shall be born 

In future years. Thy mother, having first 

Prayed to the gods, appointed noble games, 

Within the circus, for the Achaian chiefs. 

Full often have I seen the funeral rites «o 

Of heroes, when the youth, their chieftain dead, 

Were girded for the games, and strove to win 

The prizes ; but I most of all admired 

Those which the silver-footed Thetis gave 



288 The Odyssey. 

To mark thy burial, who wert loved by all "5 

The immortals. So tlrou hast not lost by death 

Thy fame, Achilles, and among the tribes 

Of men thy glory will be ever great ; 

But what hath it availed me to have brought 

The war on Ilium to an end, since Jove 120 

Doomed me to be destroyed on my return, 

Slain by iEgisthus and my guilty wife ? " 

So talked they with each other. Now approached 
The herald Argus-queller, bringing down 
The souls of suitors by Ulysses slain. us 

Both chiefs moved toward them, wondering at the sight. 
The soul of Agamemnon, Atreus' son, 
Knew well renowned Amphimedon, whose birth 
Was from Melanthius, and by whom he once 
Was welcomed to his house in Ithaca ; 130 

And him the son of Atreus first bespake : — 

" Amphimedon, what sad mischance has brought 
You all, who seem like chosen men, and all 
Of equal age, into these drear abodes 
Beneath the earth ? 'T were hard indeed to find, 135 

In a whole city, nobler forms of men. 
Has Neptune wrecked you in your ships at sea 
With fierce winds and huge waves, or armed men 



Book xxiv. 289 

Smitten you on the land, while carrying off 

Their beeves and sheep, or fighting to defend 140 

Your wives and city ? Tell me, for I claim 

To have been once your guest. Rememberest thou 

I lodged in thy own palace when I came 

With godlike Menelaus, and besought 

Ulysses to unite his gallant fleet «4s 

To ours, and sail for Troy. A whole month long 

Were we in crossing the wide sea, and hard 

We found the task to gain as our ally 

Ulysses, the destroyer of walled towns." 

The soul of dead Amphimedon replied : 15° 

" Atrides Agamemnon, far renowned, 
And king of men, I well remember all 
Of which thou speakest ; I will now relate, 
And truly, how we met our evil end. 
We wooed the wife of the long-absent chief 155 

Ulysses ; she rejected not nor yet 
Granted our suit, detested as it was, 
But, meditating our destruction, planned 
This shrewd device. She laid upon the loom 
Within her rooms a web of delicate threads, «s° 

Ample in length and breadth, and thus she said 
To all of us : ' Young princes, who are come 

vol. 11. 37 



290 The Odyssey. 

To woo me, — since Ulysses is no more, 

My noble husband, — urge me not, I pray, 

To marriage, till I finish in the loom — 165 

That so my threads may not be spun in vain — 

A funeral vesture for the hero-chief 

Laertes, when his fatal hour shall come, 

With death's long sleep ; else some Achaian dame 

Might blame me, should Ileave without a shroud 17° 

Him who in life possessed such ample wealth.' 

Such were her words, and easily they won 

Upon our generous minds. So went she on 

Weaving that ample web, and every night 

Unravelled it by torchlight. Three full years 175 

She practised thus, and by the fraud deceived 

The Grecian youths ; but when the hours had brought 

The fourth year round, a woman who knew all 

Revealed the mystery, and we ourselves 

Saw her unravelling the ample web. '8° 

Thenceforth constrained, and with unwilling hands, 

She finished it. And when at length she showed 

The vesture she had woven, the broad web 

That she had bleached to brightness like the sun's 

Or like the moon's, some hostile deity 185 

Brought back Ulysses to a distant nook 



Book xxiv. 291 

Of his own fields, and to his swineherd's lodge. 

And thither also came in his black ship 

His son, returning from the sandy coast 

Of Pylos. Thence the twain, when they had planned 19° 

To slay the suitors, came within the walls 

Of the great city ; first Telemachus, 

And after him Ulysses, with his guide 

The swineherd. He was clad in sordid weeds, 

And seemed a wretched beggar, very old, 195 

Propped on a staff*. In that disguise of rags 

None knew him, as he suddenly appeared, 

Not even the oldest of us all. Harsh words 

And blows we gave him. He endured them all 

Awhile with patience, smitten and reviled «>o 

In his own palace. Moved at length by Jove, 

He and his son Telemachus bore off 

The shining weapons from the hall, to lie 

In a far chamber, and barred all the doors. 

Then, prompted by her husband's craft, the queen *°5 

Proposed a game of archery, with bow 

And rings of hoary steel, to all of us 

Ill-fated suitors. This drew on our death. 

Not one of us could bend that sturdy bow, 

None had the strength. But as it passed from us *'° 



292 The Odyssey. 

Into Ulysses' hands, we loudly chid 

The bearer, and forbade him, but in vain. 

Telemachus alone with stern command 

Bade him deliver it. When in his hands 

The much-enduring chief, Ulysses, took "5 

The bow, he drew the string with ease, and sent 

A shaft through all the rings. He sprang and stood 

Upon the threshold ; at his feet he poured 

The winged arrows, cast a terrible glance 

Around him, and laid King Antinoiis dead, "° 

Then sent the fatal shafts at those who stood 

Before him ; side by side they fell and died. 

Some god, we saw, was with them, as they rushed 

Upon us mightily, and chased us through 

The palace, slaying us on every side ; «5 

And fearful were the groans of dying men, 

As skulls were cloven, and the pavement swam 

With blood. Such, Agamemnon, was the fate 

By which we perished. Now our bodies lie 

Neglected at the palace ; for not yet 23° 

Our kindred, dwelling in our homes, have heard 

The tidings, nor have come to cleanse our wounds 

From the dark blood, and lay us on the bier 

With tears, — such honors as are due the dead." 



Book xxiv. 293 

In turn the soul of Agamemnon spake : 235 

" Son of Laertes, fortunate and wise, 
Ulysses ! thou by feats of eminent might 
And valor dost possess thy wife again. 
And nobly minded is thy blameless queen, 
The daughter of Icarius, faithfully *4° 

Remembering him to whom she gave her troth 
While yet a virgin. Never shall the fame 
Of his great valor perish, and the gods 
Themselves shall frame, for those who dwell on earth, 
Sweet strains in praise of sage Penelope. 245 

Not such was she who treacherously slew 
The husband of her youth, — she of the house 
Of Tyndarus. Her name among mankind 
Shall be the hateful burden of a song ; 
And great is the dishonor it has brought 25° 

On women, even the faithful and the good." 

So talked they with each other, standing there 
In Pluto's realm beneath the vaulted earth. 
Meantime Ulysses, hasteningfrom the town, 
Came to the fair fields of Laertes, tilled *55 

With care. Laertes, after years of toil, 
Acquired them. There his dwelling stood ; a shed 
Encircled it, where ate and sat and slept 



294 The Odyssey. 

The servants of the household, who fulfilled 

His slightest wish. An old Sicilian dame 26 ° 

Was there, who waited, in that distant spot, 

On her old master with assiduous care. 

And then Ulysses to his followers said : — 

" Go into that fair dwelling, and with speed 
Slay for our feast the fattest of the swine. *«s 

I go to prove my father ; I would learn 
Whether he knows me when he sees my face, 
Or haply knows me not, so long away." 

He spake, and laid his weapons in their hands. 
Straight toward the house they went. Ulysses passed *7° 
Into the fruitful orchard, there to prove 
His father. Going down and far within 
The garden-plot, he found not Dolius there, 
Nor any of the servants, nor his sons. 
All were abroad, old Dolius leading them. 275 

They gathered thorns to fence the garden-grounds. 
There, delving in that fertile spot, around 
A newly planted tree, Ulysses saw 
His father only, sordidly arrayed 

In a coarse tunic, patched and soiled. He wore **° 

Patched greaves of bullock's hide upon his thighs, 
A fence against the thorns ; and on his hands 



Book xxiv. 295 

Gloves, to protect them from the prickly stems 

Of bramble ; and upon his head a cap 

Of goatskin. There he brooded o'er his grief. as 5 

Him when the much-enduring chief beheld, 

Wasted with age and sorrow-worn, he stopped 

Beside a lofty pear-tree's stem and wept, 

And pondered whether he should kiss and clasp 

His father in his arms, and tell him all, 19° 

How he had reached his native land and home, 

Or question first and prove him. Musing thus, 

It pleased him to begin with sportive words ; 

And thus resolved, divine Ulysses drew 

Near to his father stooping at his task, 295 

And loosening the hard earth about a tree, 

And thus the illustrious son accosted him : — 

" O aged man ! there is no lack of skill 
In tending this fair orchard, which thy care 
Keeps flourishing ; no growth is there of fig, 3°° 

Vine, pear, or olive, or of plants that grow 
In borders, that has missed thy friendly hand. 
Yet let me say, and be thou not displeased, 
Thou art ill cared for, burdened as thou art 
With years, and squalid, and in mean attire. 3°s 

It cannot be that for thy idleness 



296 The Odyssey. 

Thy master treats thee thus ; nor is there seen 

Aught servile in thy aspect, — in thy face 

Or stature; thou art rather like a king; 

Thou seemest one who should enjoy the bath 3>° 

And banquet, and lie soft, — for this befits 

Old men like thee. Now say, and tell me true, 

Who may thy master be ? whose orchard this 

Which thou dost tend ? And, more than this, declare, 

For much I long to know, if I am come 3*5 

To Ithaca, as I just now was told 

By one who met me as I came, — a man 

Not overwise, who would not stop to tell 

What I desired to learn, nor bear to hear 

My questions, when I asked him if a guest s»° 

Of mine were living yet in health, or dead 

And in the realm of Pluto. Let me speak 

Of him, and mark me well, I pray ; I lodged 

Once, in my native land, a man who came 

Into my house, and never stranger yet 3*5 

More welcome was than he. He was by birth • 

Of Ithaca, he said, Laertes' son, 

And grandson of Arcesias. Him I led 

Beneath my roof, and hospitably lodged, 

And feasted in the plenty of my home, $3° 



Book xxiv. 297 

And gave such gifts as might become a host, — 

Seven talents of wrought gold, a silver cup 

All over rough with flowers, twelve single cloaks, 

Twelve mats, twelve mantles passing beautiful, 

And tunics twelve, and, chosen by himself, 33s 

Twelve graceful damsels, skilled in household arts." 

And then his father answered, shedding tears : 
" Thou art indeed, O stranger, in the land 
Of which thou dost inquire, but wicked men 
And lawless now possess it. Thou hast given 340 

Thy generous gifts in vain ; yet hadst thou found 
Ulysses living yet in Ithaca, 

Then would he have dismissed thee recompensed 
With gifts and liberal cheer, as is the due 
Of him who once has been our host. Yet say, 34s 

And truly say, how many years have passed 
Since thou didst lodge my son, if he it was, 
Thy hapless guest, whom, far a'way from home 
And all his friends, the creatures of the deep, 
And the foul birds of air, and beasts of prey, 35° 

Already have devoured. No mother mourned 
His death and wrapped him in his shroud, nor I, 
His father ; nor did chaste Penelope, 
His consort nobly dowered, bewail the man 

VOL. II. 38 



298 The Odyssey. 

She loved upon his bier with eyes dissolved 355 

In tears, as fitting was, — an honor due 

To those who die. Now, further, truly tell, 

For I would learn, what is thy name, and whence 

Thou comest, from what tribe, thy city where, 

And who thy parents. Where is the good ship 36° 

At anchor which has brought thee and thy friends ? 

Or hast thou landed from another's bark, 

Which put thee on the shore and left the isle ? " 

Ulysses, the sagacious, answered thus : 
" I will tell all and truly. I am come 365 

From Alybas ; a stately dwelling there 
Is mine, Apheidas is my father, son 
Of royal Polypemon, and my name 
Eperitus. Some deity has warped 

My course astray from the Sicanian coast, 37° 

And brought me hitherward against my will. 
My bark lies yonder, stationed by the field 
Far from the city. This is the fifth year 
Since parting with me thy Ulysses left 
My native land for his, ill-fated man ! 375 

Yet there were flights of birds upon the right 
Of happy presage as he sailed, and I 
Dismissed him cheerfully, and cheerfully 



Book xxiv. 299 

He went. We hoped that we might yet become 

Each other's guests, exchanging princely gifts." 380 

He spake, and a dark cloud of sorrow came 
Over Laertes. With both hands he grasped 
The yellow dust, and over his white head 
Shed it with piteous groans. Ulysses felt 
His heart within him melted ; the hot breath 385 

Rushed through his nostrils as he looked upon 
His well-beloved father, and he sprang 
And kissed and clasped him in his arms, and said : — 

" Nay, I am he, my father ; I myself 
Am he of whom thou askest. I am come 39° 

To mine own country in the twentieth year. 
But calm thyself, refrain from tears, and grieve 
No more, and let me tell thee, in a word, 
I have slain all the suitors in my halls, 
And so avenged their insolence and crimes." 395 

And then Laertes spake again, and said : 
" If now thou be Ulysses, my lost son, 
Give some plain token, that I may believe." 

Ulysses, the sagacious, answered thus : 
" First, then, behold with thine own eyes the scar 4°=> 

Which once the white tusk of a forest boar 
Inflicted on Parnassus, when I made 



300 The Odyssey. 

The journey thither, by thy own command, 

And by my gracious mother's, to receive 

Gifts which her father, King Autolycus, 4°s 

Once promised, when he came to Ithaca. 

And listen to me further ; let me name 

The trees which in thy well-tilled orchard grounds 

Thou gavest me ; I asked them all of thee, 

When by thy side I trod the garden walks, 41° 

A little boy. We went among the trees, 

And thou didst name them. Of the pear thirteen, 

And of the apple ten thou gavest me, 

And forty fig-trees ; and thou didst engage 

To give me fifty rows of vines, each row 41 s 

Of growth to feed the winepress. Grapes are there 

Of every flavor when the hours of Jove 

Shall nurse them into ripeness from on high." 

He spake ; a trembling seized the old man's heart 
And knees, as he perceived how true were all 4*° 

The tokens which Ulysses gave. He threw 
Round his dear son his arms. The hardy chief, 
Ulysses, drew him fainting to his heart. 
But when the old man's strength revived, and calm 
Came o'er his spirit, thus he spake again : — 425 

" O father Jove, assuredly the gods 



Book xxiv. 301 

Dwell on the Olympian height, since we behold 

The arrogant suitors punished for their crimes. 

Yet much I fear lest all the Ithacans 

Throng hither, and send messages to rouse 43° 

Against us all the Cephallenian states." 

Ulysses, the sagacious, answered thus : 
" Take courage ; let no thought like that disturb 
Thy mind ; but let us hasten to the house. 
Telemachus is there, with whom I sent 435 

The herdsman and the swineherd, bidding them 
Make ready with all speed our evening meal." 

Thus talked the twain, and toward the dwelling took 
Their way, and entering the commodious rooms 
They found Telemachus, and by his side 44° 

The herdsman and the keeper of the swine, 
Dividing for the feast the plenteous meats, 
And mingling the dark wine. Then to the bath 
Came the Sicilian dame, and ministered 
To the large-souled Laertes, and with oil 445 

Anointed him, and wrapped a sumptuous cloak 
About him. Pallas gave the monarch's limbs 
An ampler roundness ; taller to the sight 
He stood, and statelier. As he left the bath, 
His son beheld with wonder in his eyes, 45° 



3<D2 The Odyssey. 

So like a god Laertes seemed, and thus 
Ulysses said to him in winged words : — 

" Some one among the ever-living gods 
Hath surely shed, O father, on thy form 
And aspect all this grace and majesty." 455 

The sage Laertes answered : " Father Jove, 
And Pallas and Apollo ! would that I 
Were now as when I took the citadel 
Of Nericus, the strongly built, beside 
The sea-shore of Epirus, leading on 460 

My Cephallenians ! With such strength as then, 
Armed for the fray, I would have met and fought 
The suitors in the palace yesterday, 
And struck down many lifeless in the hall, 
And greatly would thy spirit have rejoiced." 465 

So talked they with each other. When they all 
Ceased from their task, and saw their meal prepared, 
They sat them down in order on the thrones 
And seats, and each put forth his hand and shared 
The banquet. Now approached an aged man, 47° 

Dolius, attended by his sons, who came 
Weary with toil, for the Sicilian dame, 
The nurse who reared them, went and summoned them, — 
She who in his late age with faithful care 



Book xxi r. 303 

Cherished the father. These, when at the board 475 

They saw Ulysses, and knew who he was, 
Stopped in the hall astonished. Instantly 
Ulysses called to them with friendly words : — ■ 

" Sit at the board, old man ; let none of you 
Give way to blank amazement. Know that we, 480 

Though keen our appetite for this repast, 
Have waited long, expecting your return." 

He spake, and Dolius sprang with outstretched arms 
And seized Ulysses by the hand, and kissed 
The wrist ; and thus in winged words he spake : — 485 

" Dear master ! since thou art returned to us, 
Who longed and yet expected not to see 
Thy face again, — since some divinity 
Has led thee hither, — hail ! and great may be 
Thy happiness, and may the gods bestow 49° 

All blessings on thee ! But declare, for I 
Would gladly know, if sage Penelope 
Have heard the tidings yet of thy return, 
Or must we send them by a messenger." 

Ulysses, the sagacious, answered thus : 495 

" My aged friend, she knows already all. 
Why wouldst thou take that care upon thyself? " 

He spake, and Dolius on a polished seat 



304 The Odyssey. 

Sat down, but round the great Ulysses came 

His sons, and welcomed him with loving words, 5°° 

And hung upon his hand, and then they took 

Their places by their father. So they sat 

Beneath Laertes' roof, and banqueted. 

Now through the city meantime swiftly ran 
The rumor that the suitors all had met s°s 

A bloody death. No sooner had men heard 
The tidings than they came with cries and moans 
Before the palace, moving to and fro. 
Each carried forth his dead, and gave to each 
His funeral rites, except to those who came 510 

From distant cities ; these they put on board 
Swift-sailing galleys of the fishermen, 
That they might bear them home. And then they came 
Sorrowing together in the market-place. 
There, when the assembly now was full, arose 515 

Eupeithes and addressed them. In his heart 
Was sorrow, that could never be consoled, 
For his slain son Antinoiis, who was first 
To fall before Ulysses. Weeping rose 
The father, and harangued the assembly thus : — 520 

" Great things, indeed, my friends, hath this man done 
For us Achaians. Many valiant men 



Book xxiv. 305 

He gathered in his ships and led abroad, 

And lost his gallant ships, and lost his men ; 

And now, returning, he has put to death 525 

The best of all the Cephallenian race. 

Come, then, and ere he find a safe retreat 

In Pylos, or in hallowed Elis, where 

The Epeians rule, pursue him ; endless shame 

Will be our portion else, and they who live 530 

In future years will hear of our disgrace. 

If we avenge not on these men of blood 

The murder of our sons and .brothers, life 

Will not be sweet to me, and I would go 

At once, and gladly, down among the dead. 535 

Rise, then, and fall upon them ere they flee." 

So spake he, weeping ; and the Greeks were moved 
With pity as they heard him. Now appeared 
The herald Medon and the sacred bard, 
As, rising from the sleep of night, they left 540 

The palace of Ulysses. They stood forth 
Amid the multitude, who all beheld 
With wonder. Then sagacious Medon spake : — 

" Give ear, ye men of Ithaca, and know 
That not without the approval of the gods 545 

Ulysses hath done this. I saw, myself, 

VOL. II. 39 



306 The Odyssey. 

One of the immortals taking part with him, 

In all things like to Mentor. Now the god 

Standing before Ulysses strengthened him 

For combat, and now drove the routed band 55° 

Of suitors through the hall ; in heaps they fell." 

He spake, and all who heard were pale with fear. 
The aged hero, Halitherses, son 
Of Mastor, then came forward ; he alone 
Knew what was past and what was yet to come, 555 

And, wisely judging, to the assembly said : — 

" Hear now my words, ye men of Ithaca. 
Through your own wrong all this has come to pass. 
To me ye would not hearken, nor obey 
When Mentor, shepherd of the people, spake. 56° 

On the mad doings of your sons ye put 
No curb, nor checked the guilty insolence 
That dared to waste the substance and insult 
The consort of a man of eminent worth, 
Who, so they thought, would nevermore return. 565 

Now be it as I counsel ; let us not 
Go forth to draw down evil on our heads." 

He spake ; but more than half the assembly rushed 
Abroad with shouts ; the others kept their place 
Together. Ill the augur's speech had pleased 570 



Book xxiv. 307 

The most. Eupeithes had persuaded them. 

They flew to arms, and when they had put on 

The glittering brass, they mustered in. close ranks 

Before the spacious city. At their head 

Eupeithes led them on, who madly deemed 57s 

Himself the avenger of his slaughtered son. 

Yet he from that encounter nevermore 

Was to return ; his fate o'ertook him there. 

Then Pallas thus addressed Saturnian Jove : 
" Our Father, son of Saturn, king of kings, s»° 

Tell me, I pray, the purpose of thy heart 
Yet unrevealed. Shall there be cruel war 
And deadly combats, or wilt thou ordain 
That these shall henceforth dwell in amity ? " 

And cloud-compelling Jove made answer thus : 585 

" My child, why ask me ? Was it not with thee 
A cherished purpose, that, returning home, 
Ulysses amply should avenge himself 
Upon the suitors ? Do, then, as thou wilt. 
Yet this, as the most fitting, I advise. 59° 

Now that the great Ulysses has avenged 
His wrongs, let there be made a faithful league 
With oaths, and let Ulysses ever reign ; 
And we will cause the living to forget 



308 The Odyssey. 

Their sons and brothers slain, and all shall dwell 595 

In friendship as they heretofore have dwelt, 
And there shall be prosperity and peace." 

He spake, and eager as she was before, 
Encouraged by his words, the goddess plunged 
Down from the summits of the Olympian mount. 6°° 

Now when they all had feasted to the full, 
The much-enduring chief, Ulysses, said : 
" Go, one of you, and see if they are near." 

He spake ; a son of Dolius at his word 
Went forth, and, coming to the threshold, stopped. 605 
He saw them all at hand, and instantly 
Bespake Ulysses thus, with winged words : 
" They are upon us ; we must arm at once." 

He spake ; they rose, and quickly were in arms. 
Four were Ulysses and his friends, and six 610 

The sons of Dolius. Old Laertes then, 
And Dolius, put on armor with the rest, 
Gray-headed as they were, for now their aid 
Was needed. When they all had clad themselves 
In shining brass, they threw the portals wide 615 

And sallied forth, Ulysses at their head. 

Now Pallas, daughter of almighty Jove, 
Drew near them. She had taken Mentor's form 



Book xxiv. 309 

And Mentor's voice. The much-enduring chief, 
Ulysses, saw her and rejoiced, and said 620 

To his beloved son, Telemachus : — 

" Now wilt thou, of thyself, Telemachus, 
Bethink thee, when thou minglest in the fray 
That tries men's valor, not to cast disgrace 
Upon thy forefathers, — a race renowned 625 

For manly daring over all the earth." 

And thus discreet Telemachus replied : 
" Nay, if thou wilt, my father, thou shalt see 
That by no lack of valor shall I cast, 
As thou hast said, dishonor on thy race." 630 

Laertes heard them, and rejoiced, and said : 
" O what a day for me, ye blessed gods, 
Is this ! With what delight I see my son 
And grandson rivals on the battle-field." 

And then the blue-eyed Pallas, drawing near 635 

Laertes, said : " Son of Arcesias, loved 
By me beyond all others of my friends, 
Pray to Jove's blue-eyed daughter, and to Jove, 
And brandish thy long spear, and send it forth." 

So Pallas spake, and breathed into his frame 64° 

Strength irresistible. The aged chief 
Prayed to the daughter of almighty Jove, 



3io The Odyssey. 

And brandished his long spear and sent it forth. 

It smote Eupeithes on the helmet's cheek. 

The brass stayed not the spear, the blade passed through, 

And heavily Eupeithes fell to earth, s 4 6 

His armor clashing round round him as he fell. 

Then rushed Ulysses and his valiant son 

Forward, the foremost of their band, and smote 

Their foes with swords and lances double-edged, 65° 

And would have struck them down to rise no more, 

If Pallas, daughter of the god who bears 

The aegis, had not with a mighty voice 

Commanded all the combatants to cease : — 

"Stay, men of Ithaca; withhold your hands 655 

From deadly combat. Part, and shed no blood." 

So Pallas spake, and they grew pale with awe, 
And fear-struck ; as they heard her words they dropped 
Their weapons all upon the earth. They fled 
Townward as if for life, while terribly 660 

The much-enduring chief Ulysses raised 
His voice, and shouted after them, and sprang 
Upon them as an eagle darts through air. 
Then Saturn's son sent down a bolt of fire ; 
It fell before his blue-eyed daughter's feet, 665 

And thus the goddess to Ulysses called : — 



Book xxiv. 3 1 1 

" Son of Laertes, nobly born and wise, 
Ulysses, hold thy hand ; restrain the rage 
Of deadly combat, lest the god who wields 
The thunder, Saturn's son, be wroth with thee." 67° 

She spake, and gladly he obeyed ; and then 
Pallas, the child of asgis-bearing Jove, 
Plighted, in Mentor's form with Mentor's voice 
A covenant of peace between the foes. 



END OF VOL. 11. 



Cambridge : Electrotyped and Printed by Welch, Bigelow. & Co. 
